Anthropology Senior Theses

University of Pennsylvania

ScholarlyCommons
Department of Anthropology

Spring 2006

At a Social Crossroads: Navajo Healing and Western Biomedicine
Rogette Esteve
University of Pennsylvania

Follow this and additional works at: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses

Q

Part of the Anthropology Commons

Recommended Citation
Esteve, Rogette, "At a Social Crossroads: Navajo Healing and Western Biomedicine" (2006). Anthropology
Senior Theses. Paper 76.

This paper is posted at ScholarlyCommons. https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/76
For more information, please contact repository@pobox.upenn.edu.

At a Social Crossroads: Navajo Healing and Western Biomedicine
Disciplines
Anthropology

This thesis or dissertation is available at ScholarlyCommons: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/76

At a Social Crossroads:
Navajo Healing and
Western Biomedicine

Rogette Esteve
Honors Thesis
Advisors: Dr. Janet Monge, Dr. Fran Barg
May 5, 2006

Abstract
This thesis elucidates the diversity of Navajo healing models and the relationship these
models have with Western Biomedicine. Through a myriad of different techniques, such
as a review of applicable theoretical models, interviews, and questionnaires, I examine
how these Navajo healing models and Western biomedicine as its own model informs the
various conceptions of health by Navajos living in an urban setting (- 76,00 Native
Americans live in the metro Phoenix area, 70% of whom are Navajo). Through research
conducted both in Philadelphia, over the phone, and in Phoenix Arizona, I was able to
find that not only are healing models are culturally informed, but also, social
infrastructures contribute to people's understanding of the world around them. We must
not take the influence of these social infrastructures for granted, for all too often they will
play a major role in how patients perceive their healing experience to be, and might very
well play a role in the outcome of their healing experience, for better or worse (refer to
Appendix D for interviews shedding more light on this particular phenomenon). We as
members of the academia and health care professionals, must be more focused on the
types of underlying social mechanisms found in institutional settings that will impact
someone's perception of what health entails.
Introduction to the Usefulness of Health Models
Models are an important means of making sense of the world around us-or
helping us change aspects of the world through the prism in which we see it. People
frequently use models not only to cognize the world, but also to build upon other
concepts and to add their own perspectives to these models. The term "model" has
several connotations, but for all practical purposes, we shall settle on one that will

hopefully tie in the major points featured in this paper. Cognitive anthropologists
D' Andrade and Strauss define cultural models as culturally formed cognitive schemas
(D' Andrade & Strauss 3). What then is a schema? A schema may be defined as a
"conceptual structure which makes possible the identification of objects and events"
(D' Andrade & Strauss 28). Schemas themselves can be broken down into their
constituent properties, but at the cost of veering away from the current task at hand,
which will be using cognitive anthropology theory and methods in investigating the
social crossroads of Navajo healing models and western biomedical models. Models can
be grossly oversimplified ways of holding various ideas together, or can be frustratingly
beautiful in the ways that they challenge the morality and sensibilities of the parties being
"represented" in a particular model. Yet how may one apply these ideas to an
overarching question of healing models as they relate to social infrastructures? One thing
is for certain is that cognitive anthropology has much to contribute to an analytical study
of the nexus between Navajo healing and Western biomedicine and the social
infrastructures linking both.
Since the beginning of time, humans have been interacting with different cultures
and have extracted what they believe to be appropriate and beneficial into their culture.
A model is a lens through which a particular society can convey its morality and
sensibilities. It is the glue that holds various ideas together. Not all of the ideas and
concepts presented in a model will agree, but a model is a unifying theme that draws even
opposing idiosyncrasies together. When applied to health, models can prove to be a
fruitful ways of making sense ofa myriad of healing elements that otherwise do not
appear to share anything in common at all. Models serve a purpose that is not altogether

made apparent while discussing the various schemas within a model. With a clear idea of
what cultural health models can be ascribed to within a particular society, one can then
begin to make accurate inferences as to what these models may mean to the members of
this society. Meaning is felt-experience toward a particular object, concept, or moment in
time. Every individual's meaning is different when it comes to models, but the
perspectives that go into these models are culturally-informed, and this is where cognitive
anthropology can go the distance in helping to analyze how people (in this case Navajos)
think about these models. This research thesis will seek to incorporate the concepts
identified above, review existing literature pertinent to the thesis, while hopefully
shedding more light on the diversity of Navajo healing models.
First, definitions are in order to provide a foundation to this thesis. D' Andrade
states that "Cognitive anthropology is the study of the relation between human society
and human thought. .. (it is a study of) how people in social groups conceive of and think
about the objects and events which make up their world" (D' Andrade 1). This definition
of cognitive anthropology feeds well into the thesis aspect of the research (thesis) I will
ultimately conduct. It is not a common occurrence for people to think about health
models since there is everyday life to think about. Still, people will both subconsciously
and consciously think about their health through the models embedded in their minds. In
addition to what has been stated above, this thesis serves the purpose of illuminating the
different types of models and examining their relationship with the social infrastructures
that help formulate them today. Indeed, social infrastructures have much to do with the
culture of that infrastructure. It would be helpful here to have a working definition of
culture and to see what sort of elements from this definition can be used in our look at

cultural health models. Anthropologist Alessaudro Duranti sums a very popular notion of
culture in the following definition of culture: "Culture is that of something learned,
transmitted, passed down from one generation to the next, through human actions, often
in the form of face-to-face interaction, and, of course, through linguistic communication"
(Durauti 23). Claudia Strauss's fax model of culture is a good starting point to
investigating cultural health models. The fax model descries how culture is trausmitted
to people, and how they in tum transmit this culture to their children (De Munck 9). It
can be seen, however, that the recipient of that knowledge does not always interpret what
they see in exactly the same way as their predecessors. Still, Strauss believes that culture
"includes both the public actions, objects aud symbols that make shared learning possible
and the private psychological states of knowledge and feeling without which these pubic
things are meaningless and could not be recreated" (D' Andrade & Strauss 6). It is these
"private psychological states" that provide people a sense of individualism as they make
informed decision about their enviromnent ... aud their health. Again, health is a
culturally-informed concept that is also subject to an individual's own ideas aud
conception of what health is. The methods section of this thesis paper will look at some
of the ways cultural health models can be studied with their accompanying social
infrastructure. But first, an overview is needed of some of the existing models as they
pertain to Navajo health.

Overview of Various Navajo Healing Models
Upon au initial glance of the literature, it is deceptively easy to synthesize the
Navajo healing experience into one holistic "Navajo healing model." However, it would
be foolhardy to gloss over the heterogeneity of the models that comprise the Navajo

healing experience, which itself will differ from person to person. The phrase "Navajo
Healing" as included in the title of this thesis is somewhat of a misnomer, for it does not
do justice to the many levels that make up each unique healing experience. Yet, this allencompassing phrase is a good launch pad for what will develop into well-studied ideas
of cultural models as they are applied to the health experiences of Navajos, and how these
experiences come to life by the social environment of these Navajos. Furthermore, this
thesis is enriched by an inclusion of Western biomedicine as one of many outside
influences that shape a particular Navajo's healing experience today. Appendix B
provides a wonderful diagram of four types of models that are currently being used
among some members of the Navajo community. The models originate from four key
elements of the Navajo society: traditional Navajo healing, Navajo Christian Healing,
Biomedical Healing, and the Navajo Native American Church Healing. Of course, other
healing models may exist from other organic elements of the Navajo people, but these
four categories of healing models are among the most well known and logical from etic
and emic representations of Navajo healing. Thomas Csordas, a leading anthropological
scholar, along with other contributors in a Medical Anthropology Quarterly volume
dedicated to Navajo healing, suggest that the "four modes of healing ... are the principal
components of the (Navajo) 'health care system' ... (and that this system) can be
conceptualized with reference to the cardinal points by means of which Navajo thinking
is oriented, and represented in contemporary Navajo style with east, the direction of the
sunrise, at the top" (Csordas 464). Referring to Appendix B ("Dine Bikeyah" signifies
Navajoland), this conceptualization is hardly off the mark in tenns of how Navajo society
incorporates their healing regimes into their social and natural environments. Of course,

this etic representation of the health care system may not be what Navajos have in mind,
but it highlights a point that Navajo healing models can and do overlap.
Scholar Caitlin O'Neil has done extensive research on Navajo healing models.
She has written on the haatali, the singer who is also !mown as the medicine man (they
are seldom women), is called after a hand trembler, or ndilniihii (often a woman) makes
her diagnosis (O'Neil 2003). O'Neil describes how there are nearly 100 Navajo chants
all originating from the Creation Story of the Navajos: "Ceremonies last anywhere from
one to nine days and include chants, songs, prayers, lectures, dances, sweat baths, prayer
sticks, and sand paintings ... The medicine man and his assistants are paid for their
services with food, jewelry, rugs, blankets, baskets, livestock, or cash" (O'Neil 2003).
Sand paintings are an important part of many sings, or ceremonies, to promote health.
The paintings themselves, with over 500 kinds, are dry paintings, where such materials as
ocher, charcoal, gypsum, cormneal, powdered flower petals, and com and other plant
pollens are used. Referring to Appendix A located toward the end of this paper, the main
symbols that appear in this sand painting include representations of the human heroes of
the Navajo origin legend and the Holy People they encountered. After the sand painting
is completed and the rites are administered for the person seeking the healing or blessing,
the sand is swept away and "given back to Mother Earth from whence it came" (O'Neil
2003). A more detailed description of the sand paintings can be found in O'Neil's
referenced article. The sand paintings confer both healing and blessings on the Navajo
people, and are pivotal in Blessing Way ceremonies. These types of ceremonies are
"kind of wish for good luck that gives hozho (harmony of the universe) to newborns, new
homes, marriages. In contrast the Enemy Way chant exorcises the ghosts of aliens,

violence, and ugliness" (O'Neil 2003). This particular model of healing looks at healing
from a holistic point of view. It takes a look at the artistic forms that may constitute a
model, such as the sand paintings. This model relies heavily on the notion of aesthetics
facilitating healing experience. Sand paintings are valued more for their healing
qualities, but there is also an aesthetic value that makes perhaps make them more intimate
for those involved in their construction.
Rationale behind this Research
The richness of healing models in any society is an exciting area of study that can
not only yield fascinating information on the level of health model consciousness in that
society, but also can yield a multitude of knowledge on other facets of that society.
Health is a concept, a lived state of being that everyone has experienced in a society.
Notions of what health should be can be one of the major defining elements of a society.
The state of a person's health often defines who a person is, and how they decide to live
the rest of the lives. The concept of health is one that is not easily defined, even within a
particular culture, since the meanings attributed to it do not always agree, and are not so
standardized. Moreover, when a culture, like the Navajo culture, has been so influenced
by outside forces, the possibility of having a unifying concept of health becomes even
more remote, and quite frankly, useless. The Navajo culture, which will be discussed in
detail in my thesis paper, is one that has been historically marred by the exertions of
outside forces, including the American health care system and American society in
general. Such is the reason why a study in cross cultural medicine among the Navajo is
particularly applicable to this society that has existed even before American society. But
my thesis will go beyond the typical analysis of medicine and health and the ways that

Navajos have reconciled (or not reconciled) their healing beliefs with Western
biomedicine. The social considerations that will be covered in this thesis will hopefully
make a positive contribution in analyzing the ways in which Navajos think of health, an
area of study that has not been studied to a significant degree. The methodology of this
study could be applied to any society in the world whose health models have been
influenced by others.
Furthermore, cross cultural medicine is a field of study that is growing ever more
popular with an increasing number ofresearch opportunities. The National Institutes of
Health's National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine would probably
categorize the Navajo traditional healing ways as a type of"Mind-body medicine
focus[ing] on the interactions among the brain, mind, body, and behavior, and the
powerful ways in which emotional, mental, social, spiritual, and behavioral factors can
directly affect health. [Mind-body medicine] regards as fundamental an approach that
respects and enhances each person's capacity for self-knowledge and self-care, and it
emphasizes techniques that are grounded in this approach." (NIH 2004). However, the
Navajo healing tradition encompasses more than just approach; indeed it is a way of life,
of healing that has had to adapt to the ever-increasing encroachment of Western
medicine. The Association of American Indian Physicians (AAIP) recently held a
workshop April 28-May 1st on cross cultural medicine. The objectives of this workshop
were to: "Identify strategies to improve communication between American Indian and
Alaska Native patients and health professionals; describe current health issues affecting
Indian communities in both reservation and urban settings; compare and contrast Western
and Traditional Medicine views of health; and improve understanding of the role of

traditional healers" (AAIP 2005). This professional body of physicians is committed to
bridging the gaps between traditional and western medicine since western medicine
continues to influence the way that Native physicians practice medicine and interact with
their patients.
Cognitive Anthropology Methods & Data Analysis

A health model is not an abstract idea but a way of thinking about health. One
person's idea if a health model is that of a systematic way of viewing health in general:
from prevention, to diagnosis, treatment, and so forth. The methods used to collect the
data will help provide different angles of looking at the issue put forth in my stated thesis,
which is still in its developing stage and will certainly be refined in the near future.
When all the data has been collected, it will be analyzed with the thesis clearly in mind.
The data analysis of the free-listing will more than likely take the shape of a quantitative
study which will be a good complement to the qualitative data already collected. The
data analysis will be done with the idea in mind that the results may not come out as
uniform as a researcher would like; nonetheless there is academic value in uncovering
data that may not be congruent but may have statistical significance in their differences.
Furthermore, taking a look at the extensional and intensional meanings of a cultural
model (Micco 2005) is invaluably important in reducing a model to its bare components.
This method can also be refined by administering a free listing sort of exercise to patients
and healthcare providers. What does healing mean to them? More specifically, what
words come to mind when I say "healing," or "siclmess" or "Western Medicine" or
"traditional healing" or "religious healing"? Any reasonable permutation of these "what

if' questions would be appropriate, and free listing is a good starting point at revealing
the backbone of a person's conceptualization of health in the social context.
Models are not only good for organizing different ideas, but also to help change
behavior. In class, the health behavior model was discussed, consisting of: susceptibility,
severity, benefits, barriers, cues to action, and self-efficacy (Barg 2005). Data analysis is
much part of a research methodology than anything else, for it guides the direction of
one's conclusions. Through a literature review and data collection phase, my thesis
reconciled the different social organizations that provide an infrastructure to these health
models. My units of analysis will include: People, particularly Navajos living in
Phoenix, and those serving the Navajo population at the PIC and PIMC. The institutions
(social infrastructures) included Phoenix Indian Center (PIC), Phoenix Indian Medical
Center (PIMC), Indian Health Service (IHS), and to some extent, the Native American
Church (NAC).
Dr. Fran Barg provides an excellent list of health behavior model variables that
can be used in the carrying out of this research thesis in a well-designed thesis. These
variables include: demographic factors, structural variables, attitudinal factors,
interactional factors, and enabling factors. Every single one of these factors are quite
related to the social infrastructure of a society, and can be applied to the data that will be
used in my thesis. Models themselves are not wholly original but are revisions of
existing knowledge, synthesized to their bare elements, re-packaged, in the hope of
shedding more light on a particular focus. With my thesis, I will strive to show how the
Navajo health models and Western models are revised from the social foundations,
moorings if you will, of Navajo and Western society. Looking at any relevant social

health organizations (such as the IHS, and WHO) as they relate to these models can aid in
shedding light on this sea of information.
Returning to Appendix B for a moment is appropriate here. Although highly
compartmentalized and cohesive in nature, the diagram does suggest some sort of unity
among these models which sometimes conflict. Nevertheless, the volume provides a
number of articles that speak to the overlap in these four models, which will not be
analyzed in great depth in this thesis. In addition to these broadly described models,
there are organizational models that will be scrutinized for validity in how they compare
to overarching models. For example, the social health model of the IHS can be seen as a
derivative of the Western biomedical model. The IHS model of health can be
extrapolated from the information provided from a blurb in their mission, goal, and
foundation: "Our Mission ... to raise the physical, mental, social, and spiritual health of
American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level. Our Goal... to assure that
comprehensive, culturally acceptable personal and public health services are available
and accessible to American Indian and Alaska Native people. Our Foundation ... to
uphold the Federal Govermnent's obligation to promote healthy American Indian and
Alaska Native people, communities, and cultures and to honor and protect the inherent
sovereign rights of Tribes" (IHS 2005). Clearly, the health model of the IHS supports a
holistic approach to health and health care, much in line with the World Health
Organization's conception ofhealth. In 1946, the WHO defined health as "a state of
complete physical, mental, and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or
infirmity" (WHO 1946). This model was conceived at a specific point in time, subject by

the social infrastructure at the time. My thesis will delve more into the specifics of this
infrastructure.
On the Indian Health Service side, Dr. Ellen Rothman, a 1998 graduate of
Harvard Medical School, has been working for the IHS in Kayenta, Arizona. Dr.
Rothman provides valuable insight into how the Indian Health Service (IHS) operates,
and what this ultimately means for the patients the IHS is designed to serve: "All IHS
physicians sign an initial contract of two years. Ifwe decide to stay, we choose to renew
our contracts year by year. Our patients are accustomed to getting to !mow a new
physician every couple of years, and they rarely identify a primary-care physician as their
own ... Our Navajo community has internalized this pervasive transience and approaches
us with hesitation, protecting itself from inevitable loss. Many of the physicians as well
are already planning the next step within months of their arrival. Some ofus stay for the
long term, but most do not" (Rothman 2002). In her article, Dr. Rothman talks about
how the earliest Western doctors "fought to enforce their own modern traditions and to
terminate the influence of the traditional medicine men" (Rothman 2002), but that since
then, Navajos have become more tolerant. Still, Western beliefs continue to pervade the
Indian Health Service, a U.S. government run agency that is at times not in touch with the
needs of the Navajo population. For Dr. Rothman, it can sometimes be frustrating to treat
patients who do not want to submit to government regulations. For example, her
pediatric patients "must receive the mandated vaccines and legally required Western
treatment for critical medical problems," (Rothman 2002); these treatments are not
always in accordance with the Navajo way of healing. Historically native peoples have
been very suspicious of the West, and with understandable reasons. Such is the reason

why the Tribal Council in 1972 established the Navajo Health Authority, and from there
the first American Indian Medical School, Navajo Area Indian Health Service, and the
Navajo Division of Health came to fruition (IHS 2005). And beginning in 1955 when the
Department of Human Health Services took over from the Bureau oflndian Affairs, more
physicians, specifically recruited for the Indian population, began to acclimate to the
Navajo ways of healing, although stereotyping of the Navajos persisted (IHS 2005). It is
clear to see how this stereotyping would adversely affect the delivery of care; yet the
natives realized that to be treated for their Western ailments, they would need to undergo
Western treatments. Much like in Chowdhury et al's study where British Bangladeshi
were able to integrate their diabetic health needs into the British medical system
(Chowdhury et al 2000), Navajos who have moved to urban areas such as Phoenix, have
done the same, all at varying degrees of assimilation. Still, competing cultural models
that find no common ground can make for a potentially deadly combination when it
comes to patient healthcare. Issues such as treatment adherence will undoubtedly arise,
and this too will be investigated in different ways in the thesis.
The models, both on the health care provider side and patient side, must be
reconciled for any meaningful healing to take place (Loewe & Freeman 2000). The
American Medical Association (AMA) is also committed to having its physicians be
more culturally competent: 'The American Medical Association (AMA) is responding to
the dramatic changes in the nation's demographics and in health care delivery systems
with a broad-based initiative to establish cultural competence as the "Fifth Physician
Competence." Our goal is to move the medical profession and the public to create
behavioral and institutional changes that will enable physicians to provide individualized,

patient-centered care that respects the multiple cultures of their patients. The Cultural
Competence Compendium (1999), a collection ofresources for physicians and the public,

is an outgrowth of this effort" (AMA 2005). A collection ofresources is only as good as
they are used, but at least the AMA is publicly committed to making cultural competency
a theory that is actually put into practice. This is their model of helping to minimize
conflicts that may arise between physicians' conceptions of health and the cultural health
models of their patients. There have been significant accomplishments in the Navajos
achieving a greater sense of agency in their healthcare while off the reservation, and
Rothman does comment (and I have personally seen on a recent trip to Arizona) that
Navajos continue to push for increased control on how their health care needs are being
met, as they should.
While looking at the social aspects of these health care models, it is also
important to collect anecdotal information that will contribute qualitative data to one's
research. For example, narratives provide a deeper understanding of one's research
question or problem in a way that numbers cannot possibly speak to. A prime example is
Sister Grace's healing narrative. Sister Grace is a Catholic healer whom two researchers
had been interviewing; she developed heart problems during the course of the three years
they knew her (Begay & Maryboy 2000). Appendix C is an explicit diagram showcasing
how the four different healing models have each played a role in Sister Grace's recovery.
Perhaps the most salient part of this diagram is the congruity that is suggested between
the four models of healing (as discussed earlier in Appendix B): Traditional (Choctaw
and Navajo), Catholic Christian, Medical Therapy (derived from the Western biomedical
model), and the Native American Church (Begay & Maryboy 2000). The arrows signify

a sense of unification, and further suggest that each model is affecting the other in some
capacity, much like a hub and spoke schema (Barg 2005). This particular schema would
more like a collection of models, with Sister Grace's heart problem located at the hub. I
chose to include this highly detailed diagram in my thesis for it is exactly the sort of
qualitative data that will enrich my research, both in the context of the Navajos and
beyond. In addition, the authors' methodology in how they conducted a study of Sister
Grace's healing will be a good blueprint for my own research.
The following story is another demonstration of how native traditions have
interfaced with the biomedical model of healthcare. While at a Navajo reservation
hospital in Fort Defiance, Arizona, Dr. Palmer Evans, an OB/GYN, wrote an article about
some of the beliefs that the Navajos hold about certain things that may happen to a
pregnant woman or her baby. A few of these taboos include the woman not breathing
deeply during delivery, lest the baby be sucked back up into her body; or the expectant
father not killing birds, lest the child end up looking like a bird. Dr. Evans prefaces the
list of taboos that pregnant woman should not do with the following: "Among the
Navajo, no less than among members of any cultural background, deeply held traditional
beliefs may have great bearing on the way an individual responds to suggestions,
treatment, and care given in the field of health. Many of their beliefs are simply common
sense, others reflect the awe with which the Indian regards native and natural phenomena,
and still others are derived from sacred myths and legends which are a part of the healing
ceremonies. Recognizing this fact, we desired to learn more about beliefs commonly
held by Navajos concerning all aspects of the maternity cycle" (Evans 97). Outlooks
such as these are exactly what is needed in cross cultural practices of medicine today. He

goes on to say, "It is imperative that we as health professionals recognize the importance
and value of Native American Medicine and be willing to work within the framework of
the culture of these great peoples" (Evans 99). And therein lies the key: working within
the framework of the traditional Navajo healing models to best serve the Navajos from a
Western standpoint.
Dr. Lori Alvord is a Navajo surgeon whose medical journey is part scientifically
informed and spiritually inspired. Her autobiography, The Scalpel and the Bear, provides
to readers an overview to how she was able to reconcile her Stanford medical training
with the healing methods of her Navajo people. Very candidly, she describes how the
"cost ofmy knowledge had been high" (Alvord 58). After her residency training, Dr.
Alvord began working as a surgeon for the Indian Health Service, and "thought home
would feel like a pair of old, worn-in moccasins, perfectly molded to the shape of my
feet, that I could slip back into. I thought Dinetah and I would always be a perfect fit~
instantly and instinctually right ... But when I finished my education and returned home, I
found that in many ways coming back to the reservation was as hard as leaving it had
been" (Alvord 58). She had to learn how to become a healer, and not merely a surgeon.
And in time, she would learn to discover the art of healing. Dr. Alvord's words truly
reveal the potential of Western medicine to improve with the incorporation of hozhoni,
meaning "Walking in Beauty," a core Navajo philosophy of balance and
interconnectedness with one's surroundings. I am a strong proponent of the benefits of
Western medicine, and can only see it improving with a more humanistic approach to the
delivery of health care. Both Navajo and Western medicine can learn from each other.
One very important note ofreference she makes is the following: "One Native American

writer and healer, Brooke Medicine Eagle, points out that the word heal comes from the
same root as whole and holiness. For Navajos, wholeness and holiness are the same
thing. The system of life is one interconnected whole. Everything is related, according
to Navajo beliefs-it is an organic and integrated way of looking at the world. The
causes and cures for illness are woven into everything else" (Alvord 113). Her patients
would come in and request ceremonies to help them have a successful surgery; Dr.
Alvord would notice that these patients' heart and blood pressure rates were lower, and
that the patients were more at ease before surgery, which has been found to decrease the
risk of complications post-surgery.
Anecdotal evidence is a key part ofresearch thesis and will be useful in the
structuring of the actual thesis. Yet nothing compares to actually experiencing an event
and being able to analyze it, without taking from the preciousness of the event Field
research can be an incredibly rewarding part of any research, especially as it relates to the
power dynamic within the social infrastructure that help comprise these models, In her
article, researcher Roma Morris observes that "Native Americans make no distinction
between the sacred and the profane, viewing all phenomena and experience as imbued
with special qualities, or medicines.,, [which] are ways of being and teaching that
contribute to the integrity of the whole-for which the sacred hoop stands as the central
symbol" (Morris 96). The person, or healer, administering these medicines, has a lot of
power, but he or she must respect the power of nature and the sacredness of the medicine,
Recently I had an opportunity to visit Arizona to conduct research for my senior thesis;
my trip was funded by a grant that I had received from the Research Experience for
Undergraduates Program, administered by the National Science Foundation. Fortunately

for me, my Navajo friend Nani's family hosted me. Nani's father, Victor Beck, is a
medicine man for his community, and he relayed to me how the elements are important
for healing, and "God made elements [such as herbs and water] for us to use" with
respect (Esteve 10/2005). Us being everyone, in my opinion. I believe that we all have
the capacity to heal on some level. Yet in a sense, because power is relative and is never
absolute among us mere mortals, social roles are also relative. Therefore, healing power
is relative and is only made meaningful by the social context in which is practiced. The
hierarchy of healing, or lack thereof, is a direct reflection of that society's values, and this
hierarchy as we have seen also impacts the healing experience for patients and healers.
While in Arizona, I had arranged to meet with healer Delmar Boni, an Apache
medicine man who serves as the spiritual health liaison of the Phoenix Indian Medical
Center (PIMC). Mr. Boni is a traditional practitioner who is also a substance abuse
specialist. He told me that the patients he sees primarily engage in the Western
biomedical model of healing because of their choice to come to the PIMC. By
"incorporat(ing) native spirituality to heal spiritual ailments" (Esteve 10/2005), Mr. Boni
is able to heal both the mind and body. I can remember Mr. Boni's office being quite
small, with an assortment of healing artifacts littered about the room. It was an intimate
space that did not feel part of a modern hospital. It was perfect in my mind for
facilitating healing. I was conducting academic research on the interplay of Navajo
traditional healing and Western biomedicine, but during the ceremony, as I felt the sound
waves of the deer rattle reverberate all around me, and smelled the sweet smell of burning
sage, I truly was transported. The rattle and sage most definitely facilitated the liminal
phase of healing (part ofmy own construction of the health model). The liminal phase

describes that intermediate phase where someone is undergoing healing; it can last for a
few minutes to years, and can be a continuous phase of existence for many people. In my
mind of course I was not thinking "I am now in the liminal phase," but instead it was
"peace" that I told myself, and felt. Mr. Boni prayed that my trip would be a safe one
while in Phoenix. As he chanted, I could not help but feel a sense of peace, kinesthically
and spiritually. During the blessing, I felt a complete peace descend down on me, and
felt that my trip to Arizona would go smoothly, which it did! Mr. Boni certainly has a
great sense of presence. On first impression, he is the type of person who has a quiet
intensity about him, but is not domineering in his approach to healing. Yes, his role is
that of a healer, but while taking this role seriously, he was able to put me at ease with the
entire blessing experience. Mr. Boni uses an "identity-based" healing model for mending
the human spirit and addressing issues of behavior modification and gratification when it
comes to substance abuse. He says that most people are people looking for who they are,
seeking their own personal narratives. In his opinion, a ceremony is a "release of what is
ailing people form emotional scars" (Esteve 10/2005). For example, combined with a
recovery program such as Alcoholics Anonymous, substance abusers, can mend their
themselves of Mr. Boni observes that "western medicine tells people what is wrong"
through psychological and physiological diagnoses. He recognizes that he has an
important social role in conducting ceremonies and blessings, and tries to be as accurate
as possible when addressing an ailment. The interplay of power dynamics cannot be
overstated, especially when it comes to competing cultural health models. This too will
be fleshed out more in my thesis.
Coming Full Circle

Throughout this thesis, I have begun to realize the full potential of Navajo healing
models and Western biomedical model, and how the juncture of these models makes
healing experiential for both the healers and the healed. The models that have been
brought up within this thesis have been touched by the social infrastructure from whence
they originated. This social infrastructure is at the heart of these models, and is the
common bond linking these models, since they must all operate within the confines of the
Navajo social structure and the American social structure. All the while, it will be
important to keep in mind the following question: How do we know that we are
understanding people's beliefs in a way that makes sense to them and to us? D' Andrade
succinctly states that is the issue of identification that is the central concern (D'Andrade
1995). It will be incredibly important to be as accurate as possible in my thesis, while
respecting the integrity of the Navajo people. Models have an important place in
research. They can both simplify, complicate, and mislead, but they are an initial step in
helping to get at the reasons why people believe what they believe, and how they have
come to believe what they believe. I hope that cognitive anthropology will continue to
help me yield more about the Navajo models of healing, their independent substantiality,
and their inter-relatedness in a Navajo society that continues to be influenced by Western
social forces.
Introduction to the Navajo Ways of Healing

In the spring of 2005, I had the opportunity to do pursue a project that has had
more personal meaning for me than any other academic endeavor of my three years at
Penn. As a result of doing this independent study, I have learned a great deal about
cross-cultural medicine, and ways of learning about different healing methods. This

project first started off with a very broad attempt to understand Native American healing
arts as a whole. As I delved deeper into my research, I began to realize that focusing on
one aspect of Native American healing would make for a better analytical study.
Consequently, I focused on examining the relationship between Navajo healing and
Western biomedicine. By this time, I had already been in conversation with Nanibaa
Beck, an REU student who, fortunately for me, is Navajo. Initially I had considered
doing a comparative study between the Navajo and other Native groups; yet after
consulting with Dr. Williams (the keeper of collections, the American section at the Penn
Museum), she and I came up with a plan on how to best put together a cohesive study for
my project. I ultimately decided to focus my project on the Navajos since there would be
a possibility for me to visit the reservation this summer, and many of my contacts were
familiar with the Navajo healing methods.
In framing my project, the Navajo culture of healing became the centerpiece of

my research. As I began reading the narrative of Dr. Lori Arviso Alvord, the first Navajo
woman surgeon, my lmowledge of the Navajo way oflife began to expand. In order for
one to draw conclusions about the two different healing styles, I had to attain a
lmowledge base from the Navajo point of view since I am already familiar with the innerworkings of Western medicine. Reading the Dr. Alvord's The Scalpel and the Bear was
truly an eye-opening experience, one that was reminiscent of Dr. Ben Carson's Gifted
Hands, an analogous narrative of an African-American brain surgeon's journey of
returning to his roots in order to become a better physician. Dr. Alvord' s story provides
for us a blueprint to how she was able to reconcile her Stanford medical training with the
healing methods of her people. Very tellingly she describes how the "cost ofmy

knowledge had been high" (Alvord 58). After her residency training, Dr. Alvord began
working as a surgeon for the Indian Health Service, and "thought home would feel like a
pair of old, worn-in moccasins, perfectly molded to the shape ofmy feet, that I could slip
back into. I thought Dinetah and I would always be a perfect fit-instantly and
instinctually right ... But when I finished my education and returned home, I found that in
many ways coming back to the reservation was as hard as leaving it had been" (Alvord
58). She had to learn how to become a healer, and not merely a surgeon. And in time,
she would learn to discover the art of healing.
The National Institutes of Health's National Center for Complementary and
Alternative Medicine would probably categorize the Navajo traditional healing ways as a
type of"Mind-body medicine focus[ing] on the interactions among the brain, mind, body,
and behavior, and the powerful ways in which emotional, mental, social, spiritual, and
behavioral factors can directly affect health. [Mind-body medicine] regards as
fundamental an approach that respects and enhances each person's capacity for selfknowledge and self-care, and it emphasizes techniques that are grounded in this
approach." (NIH 2004). However, the Navajo healing tradition encompasses more than
just approach; indeed it is a way oflife, of healing that has had to adapt to the everincreasing encroachment of Western medicine.

Traditional Navajo Healing Methods
Scholar Caitlin O'Neil has done extensive research on Navajo healing methods.
She writes of how the haatali, the singer who is also !mown as the medicine man (they
are seldom women), is called after a hand trembler, or ndilniihii (often a woman) makes

her diagnosis (O'Neil 2003). O'Neil describes how there are nearly 100 Navajo chants
all originating from the Creation Story of the Navajos: "Ceremonies last anywhere from
one to nine days and include chants, songs, prayers, lectures, dances, sweat baths, prayer
sticks, and sand paintings ... The medicine man and his assistants are paid for their
services with food, jewelry, rugs, blankets, baskets, livestock, or cash" (O'Neil 2003).
Sand paintings are an important part of many sings, or ceremonies, to promote health.
The paintings themselves, with over 500 kinds, are dry paintings, where such materials as
ocher, charcoal, gypsum, cornmeal, powdered flower petals, and corn and other plant
pollens are used. As seen on page 2 of this paper, the main symbols that appear in sand
paintings include representations of the human heroes of the Navajo origin legend and the
Holy People they encountered. After the sand painting is completed and the rites are
administered for the person seeking the healing or blessing, the sand is swept away and
"given back to Mother Earth from whence it came" (O'Neil 2003). A more detailed
description of the sand paintings can be found in O'Neil's referenced article. The sand
paintings confer both healing and blessings on the Navajo people, and are pivotal in
Blessing Way ceremonies. These types of ceremonies are "kind of wish for good luck
that gives hozho (harmony of the universe) to newborns, new homes, r marriages. In
contrast the Enemy Way chant exorcises the ghosts of aliens, violence, and ugliness"
(O'Neil 2003).
Navajo weavings throughout the years have been a wonderful reflection of the
Dine, and how they came to be on this earth: "According to Navajo myth, the Dine or the

People, were led to the Southwest from the underworld by the Holy People. Spider Man
taught the Navajos how to make a loom from sunshine, lightning and rain. Spider Woman

taught them to weave." (TFAOI 2000). Perhaps at a future time, I will be giving these
weavings a more in-depth look, and expanding on my work to include the weavings as a
reflection of the Navajo culture, with a particular focus on how the sand paintings are
represented in the weavings.
Physicians on the Reservation
Dr. Alvord's words helped me discover the potential of Western medicine to
improve with the incorporation of hozhoni, meaning "Walking in Beauty," a core Navajo
philosophy of balance and interconnectedness with one's surroundings. I am a strong
proponent of the benefits of Western medicine, and can only see it improving with a more
humanistic approach to the delivery of health care. Both Navajo and Western medicine
can learn from each other. One very important note of reference she makes is the

following: "One Native American writer and healer, Brooke Medicine Eagle, points out
that the word heal comes from the same root as whole and holiness. For Navajos,
wholeness and holiness are the same thing. The system oflife is one interconnected
whole. Everything is related, according to Navajo beliefs-it is an organic and integrated
way of looking at the world. The causes and cures for illness are woven into everything
else" (Alvord 113). Her patients would come in and request ceremonies to help them
have a successful surgery; Dr. Alvord would notice that these patients' heart and blood
pressure rates were lower, and that the patients were more at ease before surgery, which
has been found to decrease the risk of complications post-surgery.
Another physician, Dr. Ellen Rothman, a 1998 graduate of Harvard Medical
School, has been working for the Indian Health Service in Kayenta, Arizona. Dr.
Rothman provides valuable insight into how the Indian Health Service (IHS) operates,

and what this ultimately means for the patients the IHS is designed to serve: "All IRS
physicians sign an initial contract of two years. Ifwe decide to stay, we choose to renew
our contracts year by year. Our patients are accustomed to getting to know a new
physician every couple of years, and they rarely identify a primary-care physician as their
own ... Our Navajo community has internalized this pervasive transience and approaches
us with hesitation, protecting itself from inevitable loss. Many of the physicians as well
are already planning the next step within months of their arrival. Some of us stay for the
long term, but most do not" (Rothman 2002). In her article, Dr. Rothman talks about
how the earliest Western doctors "fought to enforce their own modem traditions and to
terminate the influence of the traditional medicine men" (Rothman 2002), but that since
then, Navajos have become more tolerant. Still, Western beliefs continue to pervade the
Indian Health Service, a U.S. government run agency that is at times not in touch with the
needs of the Navajo population.
For Dr. Rothman, it can sometimes be frustrating to treat patients who do not
want to submit to government regulations. For example, her pediatric patients "must
receive the mandated vaccines and legally required Western treatment for critical medical
problems," (Rothman 2002); these treatments are not always in accordance with the
Navajo way of healing. Historically native peoples have been very suspicious of the
West, and with understandable reasons. Beginning in 1955 when the Department of
Human Health Services took over from the Bureau ofindian Affairs, more physicians
specifically recruited for the Indian population began to acclimate to the Navajo ways of
healing, although stereotyping of the Navajos persisted. It is clear to see how this would
adversely affect the delivery of care; yet the natives realized that to be treated for their

Western ailments, they would need to undergo Western treatments. There have been
significant accomplishments in gaining more control, including Rothman notes how the
Navajos continue to push for increased control on how their health care needs are being
met. The Tribal Council in 1972 established the Navajo Health Authority, and from there
the first American Indian Medical School, Navajo Area Indian Health Service, and the
Navajo Division of Health came to fruition.
E-mail Response (March 29, 2005) from Dr. Harriet Hopf about her time working
with the Indian Health Service:

"I spent 6 weeks in the Pediatric outpatient clinic at the Tuba City
Indian Health Services Hospital in Nov-Dec, 1986, while I was a 4th
year medical student at Dartmouth. We didn't get much into
traditional medicine in the clinic, although it was a topic of
discussion educationally. About half of what we did was "well baby"
and "well child" visits-- somewhat ironic titles, as virtually all
required either iron for anemia or antibiotics. Most other visits
were for strep throat (very common) and ear infections (also more
common among Navajo because of Eustachian tube anatomy). The
particular issues we faced had mostly to do with poverty. Many
patients lived in hogans without running water or electricity, many
miles from town ( and no car). So just getting there was a big
problem. Follow-up visits were a huge challenge. Ifwe suspected
infection, we gave antibiotics, as there was often no way to get
culture results to the patient-- or antibiotics, for that matter.
One big issue was medication timing-- there was some sort of sheet to

demonstrate what four times a day meant (phases of the sun, I think),
etc, as these are not natural concepts to the Navajo. Also, the
clinic had set up a system for patients to be able to make specific
time appts, rather than wait in line. Only about 10% of patients
took advantage of this, because most couldn't control arrival time
enough to make an appt. So going to the doctor meant waiting hours
in the waiting room after hitching in-- truly an all day event. With
all this, we didn't have that much time to consider traditional
methods, even though all the physicians I worked with were very
interested. It wasn't apparent to me that use of traditional
medicine delayed coming to treatment-- other factors (distance)
seemed a much bigger influence. Because kids are generally healthy,
and the value of antibiotics for treating infections (about 80% of
what I saw) was clearly recognized (at least by the folks who brought
their kids to clinic), there also wasn't a lot of opportunity to see
the use of traditional medicine. It might have been happening at
home, but it wasn't brought up in the clinic visit.
The clinic was, at heart, a very western oriented clinic, although it
certainly had a very Navajo flavor. The nurse was a
great-grandmother and a Navajo (not very old), and I remember she was
very helpful at translating both language and culture for us. I was
much more aware of Navajo traditions outside the clinic. Visiting
students were made welcome into the local social scene (pow-wows

including cake walks-- perhaps a little westernized!) and our
preceptors encouraged us to learn about the culture. So I learned a
little Navajo (only remember how to say hello now), and we discussed
and experienced the balanced, nature-focused Navajo approach. And
also the degree to which it was hard to maintain in the arid
wasteland of the corner of desert allotted to the reservation. So
what I learned wasn't so much about traditional medicine, but rather
the difficulty of applying western medicine with cultural and
economic barriers. I imagine I would have had a somewhat different
experience in the adult clinic, and we probably didn't see the truly
traditional kids.
I know Dartmouth still has a relationship and uses Tuba City as a
rotation site (for the 6 week primary care clerkship), so it might be
interesting to talk to some recent students, or those who rotated on
the adult service. I could hook you up with someone, I think-- it's
a small school, and even almost 20 years after I graduated I still
know a lot of the faculty."
Dr. Hopfs experience shows that even though she was based in Tuba City
(located on the western portion of the reservation), she treated her patients in a very
Western environment. She cites the difficulty of "applying western medicine with
cultural and economic barriers" which was another one of Ellen Rothman's concerns as
well. Most Navajos' way oflife does not depend on technology the way that Westerners
do, and this certainly affects the delivery of health care. Ellen Rothman talks about how

the "cost of building telephone lines to isolated clusters of homes is prohibitive, and as a
result nearly 70 percent (of Navajos) live without a phone" (Rothman 2003). This makes
it harder for her to communicate with her patients, not to mention the kinds of issues that
arise with taking medications on a time during the day (as Dr. Hopf mentions above).
Phone Interview with Dr. Palmer Evans conducted April 8, 2005, lOa.m

Dr. Evans is currently Vice-President for quality and network management of the
Tucson Medical Center in Arizona. Between 1974 and 1996, he was an OB/GYN in
private practice, and worked in 1972-4 Fort Defiance Indian Hospital as the chief of OBGYN. Dr. Evans worked two years with the IHS to avoid fighting in the Vietnam War.
He describes the Fort Deviance hospital at the time as being remote, as if you were in a
third world county; he encountered a lot of high risk problems in obstetrics such a
toxemia (blood poisoning), a high tuberculosis incidence, among other ailments. At the
time, "medicine men did not come into hospital" so as to avoid contamination. Dr. Evans
says that patients were sent to the medicine men first, then came to the hospital, and that
"patients felt better" for it. He says that some of the patients were part of organized
religions along with the Navajo religion. He was sure not to offend their culture, and
wanted to facilitate what was best for the patient. Dr. Evans mentions that sings were a
part of this facilitation.
When asked ifhe found there to be a major dichotomy in attitudes between the
two models of medicine, he replies "occasionally." He cites an example of how one
patient who had been suffering from cervical cancer had gone to medicine man to
medicine man, and came too late to the hospital for treatment. Dr. Evans says that
women had a better response to western medicine. He notes something interesting that

unemployment was high for the men, but low for the women who were involved in
producing tourist goods; thus these women would come in to his office asking for
contraception since having more children would be taking time from their merchandise
production; however, the women did not want their husbands to discover they were
taking these contraceptive measures. Some women would come in from remote places to
get their tubes tied, but this would not happen in a timely manner since the hospital,
under the auspices of the U.S. government, required a 72-hour waiting period from the
time of request for a tubal ligation to the actual procedure. This of course compromised
the women's right to contraceptive measures, and caused undue stress from a pregnancy
that would result if the woman was not able to trek back to the hospital.
While at the hospital in Fort Defiance, Dr. Evans wrote an article about some of
the beliefs that the Navajos hold about certain things that may happen to a pregnant
woman or her baby. A few of these taboos include the woman not breathing deeply
during delivery, lest the baby be sucked back up into her body; or the expectant father not
killing birds, lest the child end up looking like a bird. Dr. Evans prefaces the list of
taboos that pregnant woman should not do with the following: "Among the Navajo, no
less than among members of any cultural background, deeply held traditional beliefs may
have great bearing on the way an individual responds to suggestions, treatment, and care
given in the field of health. Many of their beliefs are simply common sense, others
reflect the awe with which the Indian regards native and natural phenomena, and still
others are derived from sacred myths and legends which are a part of the healing
ceremonies. Recognizing this fact, we desired to learn more about beliefs commonly
held by Navajos concerning all aspects of the maternity cycle" (Evans 97). Outlooks

such as his are exactly what is needed in cross cultural practices of medicine today. He
goes on to say, "It is imperative that we as health professionals recognize the importance
and value of Native American Medicine and be willing to work within the framework of
the culture of these great peoples" (Evans 99). And therein lies the key: working within
the framework of the traditional Navajo healing to best serve the Navajos from a Western

standpoint.
The Association of American Indian Physicians (AAIP) and the AMA
The AAIP recently held a workshop April 28-May 1st on cross cultural medicine.
The objectives of this workshop were to: "Identify strategies to improve communication
between American Indian and Alaska Native patients and health professionals; describe
current health issues affecting Indian communities in both reservation and urban settings;
compare and contrast Western and Traditional Medicine views of health; and improve
understanding of the role of traditional healers." This professional body of physicians is
committed to bridging the gaps between Traditional and Western medicine since Western
medicine continues to influence the way that Native physicians practice medicine and
interact with their patients.
The American Medical Association (AMA) is also committed to having its
physicians be more culturally competent: "The American Medical Association (AMA) is
responding to the dramatic changes in the nation's demographics and in health care
delivery systems with a broad-based initiative to establish cultural competence as the
"Fifth Physician Competence." Our goal is to move the medical profession and the public
to create behavioral and institutional changes that will enable physicians to provide
individualized, patient-centered care that respects the multiple cultures of their patients.

The Cultural Competence Compendium (1999), a collection of resources for physicians
and the public, is an outgrowth of this effort" (AMA 2005). A collection ofresources is
only as good as they are used, but at least the AMA is publicly committed to making
cultural competency a theory that is actually put into practice.
Personal Reflections & Fnture Directions
This thesis research has forced me away from the scientific aesthetic model, and
moved me closer to a more culturally relevant and in-depth understanding of what
medicine is, and how it is practiced on the Navajo reservation. I learned to better
appreciate what it means to be a pre-med, to truly evaluate why I wanted to pursue
medicine, and began planting seeds of cultural competency and understanding and
bioethical perspectives that will make me a better physician. The REU program has been
the primary vehicle that has helped put my college experience into perspective. It even
encouraged me to make a head start in the medical school application process by writing
a general personal statement.
Reiterating some of the questions I had asked Dr. Evans above, I am interested in
eliciting answers on the following questions: From your own experience, what has been
your impression of how the Navajos practice their own traditional medicine along with
Western medicine? What sorts of objects/rituals/ceremonies have you personally seen
been employed? At what point (maybe a particular stage ofa disease) have you seen
Navajos consult with Western physicians? More importantly, do you find there to be a
major dichotomy in attitudes between the two models of medicine? I am also interested
in people who have experienced both healing systems, as patients, people who work with
the Indian Health Service in Gallup, Fort Defiance, and medicine men/women.

I had visited Arizona in the hope of shedding more light on the relationship between
Navajo healing and western medicine. My trip was funded by a grant that I had received
from the Research Experience for Undergraduates Program, administered by the National
Science Foundation. In Arizona, I had arranged to meet with healer Delmar Boni, an
Apache medicine man who serves as the spiritual health liaison of the Phoenix Indian
Medical Center (PIMC). Mr. Boni is a traditional practitioner who is also a substance
abuse specialist. He told me that the patients he sees primarily engage in the Western
biomedical model of healing because of their choice to come to the PIMC. By
"incorporat(ing) native spirituality to heal spiritual ailments" (Esteve 10/2005), Mr. Boni
is able to heal both the mind and body.
I can remember Mr. Boni's office being quite small, with an assortment of healing
artifacts littered about the room. It was an intimate space that did not feel part of a
modem hospital. It was perfect in my mind for facilitating healing. While I conducted
my interview for my thesis research on the interplay of Navajo traditional healing and
Western biomedicine, but during the ceremony, as I felt the sound waves of the deer
rattle reverberate all around me, and smelled the sweet smell of burning sage, I truly was
transported. The rattle and sage most definitely facilitated the liminal phase for me, but
in my head of course I was not thinking "I am now in the liminal phase," but instead it
was "peace" that I told myself, and felt. Mr. Boni prayed that my trip would be a safe
one while in Phoenix. As he chanted, I could not help but feel a sense of peace,
kinesthetically and spiritually. Mr. Boni's soothing yet authoritative voice, the sound of
the rattle, the intimate space of the earth-tone decorated office all contributed positively
to my healing experience. It was as ifI had been transported to another dimension as all

of these liminal elements culminated into an experience I will never forget. During the
blessing, I felt a complete peace descend down on me, and felt that my trip to Arizona
would go smoothly, which it did! Mr. Boni certainly has a great sense of presence. On
first impression, he is the type of person who has a quiet intensity about him, but is not
domineering in his approach to healing. Yes, his role is that of a healer, but while taking
this role seriously, he was able to put me at ease with the entire blessing experience.
Mr. Boni uses an "identity-based" format for healing the human spirit and
addressing issues of behavior modification and gratification when it comes to substance
abuse. He says that most people are people looking for who they are, seeking their own
personal narratives. In his opinion, a ceremony is a "release of what is ailing people form
emotional scars" (Esteve 10/2005). For example, combined with a recovery program
such as Alcoholics Anonymous, substance abusers, can mend their themselves of Mr.
Boni observes that "western medicine tells people what is wrong" through psychological
and physiological diagnoses. He explains that when doctors make a diagnosis, they are
giving a name that confers an identity to the patient's illness. Mr. Boni likened this with
a naming ceremony which serves the purpose of naming an illness, a person, or what
have you. The story of Mr. Boni's grandfather, Duncan Stanley, is a good example of
how a social hierarchy can impact someone's identity. Years ago, the Department of
Indian Affairs had given Mr. Stanley food and cattle which the department had branded
"GS." From that point on, Mr. Stanley associated himself with the name GS in large part
because his cattle had been given that designation. Consequently, he became known as
GS more so than his first name, Duncan. The story is not related to anything healthrelated, but it is a demonstrative anecdote that a name holds a lot of power, especially

when the name is "given" by a person of higher authority. In the same vein, doctors have
the type of power to affect their patients just by the diagnoses made.
This is why it is so important for health care providers, from whatever healing
perspective, to sufficiently gather their patients' narratives and illness histories to make
accurate diagnoses that will then impact how they live their lives. These narratives
themselves are influenced by social factors beyond their control, such as the social

environment in which these illness narratives are constructed. The most important lesson
learned from this research is that healing models are culturally informed, and that social
infrastructures contribute to people's understanding of the world around them. We must
not take the influence of these social infrastructures for granted, for all too often they will
play a major role in how patients perceive their healing experience to be, and might very
well play a role in the outcome of their healing experience, for better or worse (refer to
Appendix D for interviews shedding more light on this particular phenomenon). We as
members of the academia and health care professionals, must be more focused on the
types of underlying social mechanisms found in institutional settings that will impact
someone's perception of what health entails.

Acknowledgments
At this time, I would like to take the opportunity to thank the many people without whom
this project could not have been possible: My thesis advisors Dr. Janet Monge & Dr. Fran
Barg for their wonderful guidance, Nanibaa Beck and her family for their hospitality in
Arizona, the National Science Foundation: Research Experience for Undergraduates for
funding my trip, Dr. Evans Palmer and Dr. Harriet Hopf for their anecdotal experience
highlighting some of the social infrastructures, and Dr. Lucy Williams for helping me to

focus on the Navajos as a possible point of study. I would also like to thank the Phoenix
Indian Center and Phoenix Indian Medical Center, in particular Delmar Boni, for their
openness and honesty. God has truly blessed me with a countless number of people
whom I could not possibly name, so thank you all!

Appendix A: Navajo Sand Painting

.
&&&.
~ ,~
"" ~

II , .  .   ..,, ....,. ........   :' '

l
. .---o',.Q

. ~ .,,pJ~~;
~

... . \WI~

-"T..J!_

-

= "--- - -~

"Sand painting is a Navajo art used in healing ceremonies. A healer creates the painting
from colored sand, crushed rock, and plant pollens in a design that depends upon the
patient's ailment and follows a strict formula. The patient sits upon the finished painting
as the healer sings or recites the proper chants. Human figures and plant forms typically
appear in sand paintings, as in this example" (MS Encarta 2005).

Appendix B: The Health Care System in Contemporary Navajo Society

Traditional Navajo Healing

SOUTH

DINE
lllKEYAH
Biomedical I fealing

Nuvajo Christian Healing

WEST

Navajo Native American Church
Healing

Source: Navajo Healing Project, Case Western Reserve University, (Csordas 2000): 465.

