Anthropology Senior Theses

University of Pennsylvania

ScholarlyCommons
Department of Anthropology

Spring 2006

Evolution and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
R Erik Malmgren-Samuel
University of Pennsylvania

Follow this and additional works at: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses

Q

Part of the Anthropology Commons

Recommended Citation
Malmgren-Samuel, R Erik, "Evolution and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)" (2006).
Anthropology Senior Theses. Paper 74.

This paper is posted at ScholarlyCommons. https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/74
For more information, please contact repository@pobox.upenn.edu.

Evolution and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
Disciplines
Anthropology

This thesis or dissertation is available at ScholarlyCommons: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/74

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

Running Head: EVOLUTION AND ADHD

Evolution and Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
R. Erik Malmgren-Samuel
University of Pennsylvania

Completed for Undergraduate Honors Thesis Credit in the
Department of Anthropology at the University of
Pennsylvania.
(May 2006)
Tom Schoenemann (Anthropology) & Amishi P. Jha
(Psychology) - Supervisors

R. Erik Malmgren-Samuel
University of Pennsylvania
Undergraduate in Biological Anthropology and Communications (majs), Psychology (min)

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

Table of Contents
1. Introduction
5. "On the Road to a Diathesis-Stress Model of ADHD"
5. Introduction
6. Dopamine and Attention
8. Evolutionary Theories of ADHD
9. DRD4 Polymorphism Models
13. Gene-General Models and Their Relevance to the DRD4
Polymorphism
16. Current Environmental Interactions in the Development of DRD4
-Related ADHD
19. References
20. "Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and the Media - An
Evolutionary Perspective"
21. Abstract
22. Introduction
30. Method
33. Results
37. Discussion
47. Conclusions
50. Platform for Future Research Directions
55. References
57. Appendix
62. Ongoing Research Efforts
62. ADHD and the Media Survey
65. The Attentional Cognition of ADHD Subjects and the DRD4 Gene
65. Overview and Funding
65. Experimenters
66. Method
68. The Role of ADHD-like Symptoms in Serial Order and Novelty in
Working Memory and Attention
68. Overview
68. Materials and Methods
72. Results
74. Table Legend
74. Figure Legend
78. General Discussion

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

Introduction
This thesis reports multiple, interdisciplinary research projects that investigate
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), attempting to place the etiology and
the epidemiology of the mental disorder in an evolutionary context. The methods
employed in the two completed and two ongoing studies reported here are recruited from
a variety of fields, with an emphasis on an interdisciplinary approach in generating
research questions, creating experiments, data analysis, and interpreting results. Though
this thesis is an example how an evolutionary vantage can inform ADHD research
specifically, the broader goal is illustrate the potential usefulness of using adaptationist
logic in the investigation of most mental disorders.
Most mental disorders that are believed to have genetic components are
associated with genes that exist in the general population at rates are that are above the
rate of random genetic mutation. This is a strong indication that these genes were
therefore selected for and maintained in the population through adaptation. This suggests
that the genes of interest code for behavioral or cognitive phenotypes that were once
adaptive, to at least a significant portion of the population. Currently, however, these
genes appear to be predisposing some of the individuals who carry them to developing
complex mental disorders. This raises the following questions: what cognitive or
behavioral components of these genes were once adaptive, and what about the modern
mental environment is different from our past environments, such that it interacts with
these genes phenotypes to create predispositions to the development of maladaptive
mental disorders?

l

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

These questions assume that mental disorders are genuine phenomenon of
maladaptive mental functioning, and that the increasing rates of mental disorder are not
simply due to a greater awareness of mental disorder by the biomedical community
(though that is a factor), but rather also by novel gene-environment interactions in which
the mental environment is dramatically changing. Our modem culture has changed the
mental environment at a rate too fast to allow certain brain-related genes to adapt. For
example ( a fictitious one), genes that once benefited the young hunter in hunter-gatherer
societies may now create antisocial behaviors in the cramped and disciplined classroom.
If it is the case that once adaptive cognitive and behavioral genes are now the underlying
bases of predispositions to mental disorders, then evolutionary logic - by placing all
current clinical knowledge and research into an adaptionist framework - is an essential
approach ifwe are to understand the causes and treatment of mental disorders.
Hopefully, such logic could also aid in the development of ways to prevent those
genetically predisposed to disorder from developing that disorder by providing coping
mechanisms as they grow throughout childhood and perhaps into adulthood.

The Research Projects Reported in This Thesis
The two articles presented - and the other active, ongoing research that is
presented after - were completed for undergraduate independent research credit, course
credit and honors credits at the University of Pennsylvania. When necessary, study
protocol was approved by the university's Institutional Review Board.
"On the Road to a Diathesis-Stress Model of ADHD"
This paper provides draws from psychiatry for its title - in a diathesis-stress
model of mental illness, the environment and genes must interact to result in disorder.

2

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

This paper outlines the considerations and questions that must be addressed if one is to
inquire about the evolutionary and enviromnental implications in the etiology of ADHD.
The paper describes the state of the current knowledge regarding ADHD - from such
diverse fields as population genetics and modern psychiatry - and attempts to provide a
conceptual framework that might be used in the integration of these approaches using an
evolutionary vantage.
"Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and the Media - An
Evolutionary Perspective"
This paper reports a meta-analytic cross-cultural investigation of ADHD and the
media with the hypothesis that one of the important contemporary enviromnental factors
that is interacting with ADHD-predisposing genes to produce ADHD is the level of
media-related enviromnental stimuli. The prediction was that countries with higher
levels of "media saturation" should positively correlate with ADHD prevalence in those
countries. Correlations, regression and factor analysis were conducted using national
ADHD prevalence rates from various studies as a proxy for the level of ADHD in a
country and national telecommunications statistics as proxies for the general level of
media saturation in the environment. The analysis produced mixed, though interesting
results.
Ongoing Research Efforts
There are currently three areas of research related to ADHD and evolution. For
more in depth descriptions, please refer to the "Ongoing Research" section.

3

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

1) The first of these efforts consists of a questionnaire that is designed to further
test the hypothesis that media is a predisposing environmental factor to the development
ofADHD.
2) The second effort is designed to look at specific features of attentional
cognition using a working-memory distract task on normal subjects who also complete
the Conners' Adult ADHD Rating Scale (CAARS), to serve as a proxy for ADHD-like
cognitions among normal populations. The task is designed to measure two things, the
ability to remember item in serial order, and the effects of adding novel features that can
either facilitate or hinder this memory process.
3) The third project is a large project using actual ADHD subjects, and may take
up to two more years to complete. The study consists of running the ADHD subjects
through a battery of attention and working memory tasks and genotyping these subjects
for the DRD4 dopamine receptor gene. Then the data will be analyzed to investigate
whether specific attentional-cognitive profiles can be correlated with either the diagnostic
subgroups, their genotypes or both.

4

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

On the Road to a Diathesis-Stress Model of ADHD
INTRODUCTION
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), a common childhood mental
disorder affecting approximately 5% of American youth, is currently understood
primarily as a behavioral disorder, characterized by inattention, hyperactivity and
impulsivity (Wolraich, Hannah et al. 1998). ThoughADHD is a complex developmental
disorder, there is considerable evidence for the presence of underlying biological
differences in the brains of people with the disorder (Swanson, Castellanos et al. 1998).
Specifically, a blunted or irregular response to the neurotransmitter dopamine appears to
contribute to the disorder. Furthermore, specific genetic contnbutors to dopamine
regulation have been implicated, though there is no single-gene model. The most widely
implicated genes are polymorphisms of the DRD4 dopamine receptor gene. This
heritable biological predisposition implies that DRD4-associated ADHD is best
characterized by a diathesis-stress model, in which a predisposition for a disorder must
react to certain environmental stressors (and possibly other genes), in order for pathology
to occur. Evolutionary theory, by focusing on gene-environment interactions, offers two
important insights into the mechanics of this diathesis-stress model: first, adaptionist
logic helps us better understand the nature of the DRD4 biological predisposition as
being a functional behavioral adaptation to certain environments; second, we can then
analyze that behavioral adaptation in the context of the contemporary environment to
identify those stressors that may contribute to the development of the maladaptive
disorder. The present paper outlines the current understanding of how the 2-repeat (2R)
and 7-repeat (7R) polymorphisms of the DRD4 gene may have evolved as frequency-

5

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

dependent ( defined below) behavioral adaptations and then suggests how those
adaptations may now serve as predispositions for distinct developmental pathways
leading to the manifestation of diagnosable ADHD. Specifically, the author suggests that
hypersensitive reactivity to environmental stimuli in 7R and 2R individuals, though
previously adaptive, is now the source of a predisposition to ADHD, because the current
environmental demands on selective attention combined with an excess of environmental
stimuli appear to stress this evolved attentional type.

DOPAMINE AND ATTENTION
Dopamine, a central neurotransmitter, has long been associated with attentional
capacities. Evidence of this association first came from the observation that
amphetamines improve attention (and indeed most pharmacological treatments for
ADHD are psychomotor stimulants that operate as dopamine agonists.) Amphetamines
stimulate the presynaptic dopamine neurons to release more cytoplasmic dopamine into
the synaptic cleft, thereby increasing the firing rate of the postsynaptic neurons. Other
psychomotor stimulants that are used to treat attention problems such as methylphenidate
(Ritalin) operate in a similar manner, increasing the firing rate of dopaminergic neurons
by altering the levels of dopamine in the synaptic cleft.
The dopamine system is an evolutionarily ancient neuronal system that serves to
regulate some of the most fundamental behaviors and cognitions. Some of the same
genes that regulate our dopaminergic system are found in all mammals, such as
laboratory rats who have the DRD4 gene, indicating both that the dopaminergic system
evolved long before homo sapiens, and that it has been consistently adaptive throughout

6

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

our evolution, as well as the evolution of all mammals. In laboratory experiments with
rats, dopamine has proven to regulate a variety of functions that are crucial for motor and
limbic functions (hyperactivity, arousal, novelty seeking) as well as directed behaviors
and their associated cognitions, such as learning and reinforcements, decision-making,
attention, and other cognitive functions that are collectively referred to as Executive
Functioning (EF) (Nieoullon 2002).
The cognitive deficits that are associated with attention and EF appear to be the
result of disordered functioning in those dopaminergic pathways that extend from
subcortical regions such as the basal ganglia and the caudate nucleus (parts of the brain
associated with basic regulatory function) to the frontal cortex (the part of the brain
responsible for higher-level cognition) (Swanson, Castellanos et al. 1998). For the
purposes of this paper, the exact specifics of the entire complex dopaminergic system
need not be reviewed because our knowledge of the role the DRD4 polymorphisms plays
in altering the dopaminergic system's functioning is limited, and our knowledge of how
these alterations effect attentional behavior is more limited.
To investigate the evolution of a behavior that predisposes one for a mental
disorder, knowing the exact chemical substrates of that behavior is not a prerequisite;
instead, we only need have evidence that a particular predisposing behavior was selected
for by the environment. At present, we know only that the relatively rare 7R and 2R
polymorphisms (as opposed to the "common'' 4R allele) of the DRD4 gene are associated
with an increased prevalence in ADHD individuals (Swanson, Oosterlaan et al. 2000),
and that these polymorphisms appear to have been selected for by the environment in a
frequency-dependent manner (Wang, Ding et al. 2004), meaning that these alleles have

7

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

been adaptive to certain percentages of the population, but were everyone to have these
alleles, they would no longer be adaptive. Another example of frequency-dependent
selection would be sickle cell disease as an adaptation to malaria.

EVOLUTIONARY THOERIES OF ADHD
There are a various hypotheses regarding the evolutionary history of ADHD. The
generally fall into one of two groups. First, researchers have begun to focus their
attention on the evolution of just the DRD4 polymorphisms. Second, many hypotheses
operate irrespective of specific genes, instead focusing on the potential adaptive purposes
of those behaviors that clinicians have identified in ADHD individuals. The present
paper will review both, as they overlap, and both have direct relevance to the
investigation of the DRD4 gene's role in our evolutionar; history and the development of
ADHD.
The DRD4-specific hypotheses are important because they directly target the
distinct predisposition to the development of ADHD that we are investigating. From this
back-to-front approach, we can begin to look at ADHD as being a maladaptive behavioral
state that can be broken into individual predisposing behavioral components (one of
which is that of the DRD4 gene), giving us a more dynamic understanding of the
complex etiology of the disorder. Further, these gene-specific models can potentially
give us direct insight into the neurochemical basis of different attentional behaviors.
Finally, because of the relatively recent selection operating on the DRD4 polymorphisms
(Ding, Chi et al. 2002), the DRD4-specific models may offer important clues about

8

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

human history in the past 100,000 years, a period during which Homo sapiens underwent
extraordinary changes such as population migration.
The gene-general models are important because we cannot know whether the
behaviors that are currently considered part of the disorder by clinical science are the
same behaviors that were selected for in our evolutionary past; instead, they may be new
manifestations of older behaviors that are encountering a novel environment in a
maladaptive manner. This front-to-back approach allows us to look at the entirety of
ADHD as a complex developmental disorder, giving us a better idea of the maladaptive
behaviors involved. Most importantly, because we do not yet know the specific
behavioral contributions of the DRD4 gene, these gene-general models may hold
valuable clues as to the selection history and the functional purpose of the DRD4
polymorphisms.

DRD4 POLYMORHPHISM MODELS
The DRD4 is a polymorphic gene, meaning that there are multiple forms of the
alleles. The common variant is the 4-repeat (4R) allele, and in most populations (except
some American ethnic populations) it is the dominant variant, followed by the 7R and
then the 2R, with the remaining polymorphisms existing at extremely low rates (Chang,
Kidd et al. 1996).

In multiple studies, the 7R polymorphism of the DRD4 has been associated with
increased prevalence in ADHD (Faraone, Doyle et al. 2001) and with the personality trait
of novelty seeking (Rogers, Joyce et al. 2004); however, the mechanisms that may
account for these associations are unclear. Worldwide allele frequencies vary

9

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

ADHD individuals from other studies (Leung, Lee et al. 2005). These results taken
together clearly indicate that the 2R is functionally similar enough to the 7R to call into
question Harpending' s explanation of the frequency data, which ignores the 2R frequency
data; however, further evidence regarding the relationship between the selection of the
7R and the 2R is needed.
The most recent model has been proposed by Wang, Ding et al. (2004), who have
used complex population genetics methods to model the selection operating on the 4R,
the 7R and the 2R alleles. The authors accept Harpending' s suggestion that the
frequencies are most likely explained by a frequency-dependent model; however, they
acknowledge that the 2R may be functionally equivalent to the 7R, and suggest that a
variety of selective pressures may have been operating on these alleles.
According to this model, the 7R allele arose about 40-50, 000 years ago, perhaps
as a rare mutational event or series of events, prior to the major out-of-Africa migrations.
Shortly thereafter, the 2R allele arose from recombination of the 7R and the 4R The
authors explain the unusually high 7R frequencies found in the Americas by citing the
population bottleneck that occurred with migration to these areas. In general the authors
remain conservative in their suggestions as to exactly what forces have selected these
alleles. They suggest that sexual selection, determined by local cultural norms may have
selected these alleles. However, they also point out the potential benefits of a "response
ready" behavioral pattern that could have been selected for in the initial population
migrations that occurred prior to local selection. This suggestion that is supported by two
studies that found faster reaction times in ADHD individuals with the 7R allele as
compared to those without (Swanson, Oosterlaan et al. 2000; Langley, Marshall et al.

12

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

2004). They also do not exclude the possibility that the 2R and the 7R may be in
competition for similar, yet distinct niches. In short, this model does not provide an
answer to the question of the alleles selection; however, it does outline the considerations
that must be taken into account as research progresses. Namely, that frequencydependent selection is operating at the local level and that the respective behavioral
contributions of both the 7R and the 2R alleles must be considered.

GENE-GENERAL MODELS AND THEIR RELEVANCE TO THE DRD4
POLYMORPHISMS
The gene-general models focus on the behavioral traits found in the clinical
diagnosis. This is advantageous because there is no single-gene model for the disorder
and we do not know the exact behavioral adaptations of the DRD4 predisposition. Such a
method gives us a broader perspective on the behaviors involved in the disorder and thus
allows us to compare the various possible adaptive functions may have been selected for
in the DRD4, and that have become maladaptive in today's environment. In effect, this
approach generates hypothetical adaptive roles that we can then apply to the DRD4
selection model we have outlined above, determining which if any can fit the frequencydependent model. It should be noted that the following comparisons of the gene-general
models to the DRD4 selection requirements are speculation at this point.
One general model is the "hunter" model, originally proposed by Hartmann
(Shelley-Tremblay and Rosen 1996), in which he proposes that pre-agricultural hunters
would have benefited from the behavior traits we see in the clinical disorder. "He
suggested that the traits of distractibility, impulsiveness and even aggression would have

13

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

been directly useful to a hunter." (Shelley-Tremblay and Rosen 1996) The problem with
Hartmann' s model is that he suggests that all hunter societies would have selected these
behaviors for all members of those societies, and therefore the current ADHD prevalence
of approximately 5% would be far too low, having needed serious deleterious selection.
Hartman suggest that agriculture would be this negative selecting force; however this
does not account for those populations in which agriculture has not been a selective force.
We can modify his hypothesis to consider a frequency-dependent scenario, in which
"hunter types" would only be beneficial to a certain low percentage of the population.
This could have been one of the local selection processes demanded by Wang's mode~ as
his model does not exclude the possibility of multiple adaptive niches.
Various authors have suggested that ADHD behaviors would have benefited
"fighters" (Shelley-Tremblay and Rosen 1996). Some propose that humans were in
direct competition with Neanderthals, and that aggressive behavior as seen in ADHD
would have been selected for. Though this particular scenario may be true, it cannot
explain the selection of the DRD4 because it again operates in a directional manner
inconsistent with a balanced polymorphism. However, from this hypothesis we can take
the notion that aggressive behavior may have played a role in local selection. This
hypothesis, similar to Harpending' s, seems like a feasible hypothesis if we
reconceptualize the aggression as being within-group fighting. It is aggressive behavior
that is cited in the famous "hawk and dove" scenario, proposed by Dawkins as an
archetypal frequency-dependent scenario, in which being aggressive is beneficial to some
members of a group, but not all because of the cost of constant confrontation. It is
important to remember that Harpending' s explanation is not necessarily incorrect because

14

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

we do not fully understand the interaction between the 7R and the 2R - male-to-male
competition could well have played a role in local, frequency-dependent selection;
however, it is unlikely that Harpending' s "cad-society'' model can account for the 2R,
due to its prevalence in large, agricultural societies such as the Chinese.
Finally, Jensen et al. (1997) have constructed a dynamic continuum of ADHD
related behavior dimensions and environtypes, in which he contrasts "problem-solving"
with "response ready" environments (in which ADHD types would be adaptive.) In
"response ready" environments: unsafe, rapidly changing or novel conditions would
select for "hypervigilant, high-scan" behaviors; time-critical conditions would select for
"impulsive" behaviors; resource-depleted conditions would select for "high motor
activity" behaviors. Respectively, in "problem-solving" environments: safe, little
changing conditions would select for "focused attention" behaviors; time-optimal
conditions would select for "non-impulsive" behaviors; resource-rich conditions would
select for "low motor activity" behaviors.
Jensen's "response ready" model is advantageous to the development of a DRD4
selection model, as Wang et al themselves suggested. First, it might help explain the
initial population spread of the 7R and 2R alleles. Once local frequency-dependent
selection took over, "response ready" environments would have discontinued as selecting
factors; however, the response ready behavioral traits (hypervigilance, impulsivity, and
high motor activity) would have continued to play a role in local selection. It is possible
that these "response ready" traits could factor into a frequency-dependent model akin to
the "hawk and dove" scenario. It is also possible that such behaviors could play a role in

15

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

sexual selection, which would support Wang's suggestion; however, more research is
needed.

CURRENT ENVIRONMENTAL INTERACTIONS IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF
DRD4-RELATED ADHD
In order to speculate as to what about the current environment is causing DRD4
polymorphisms to become a predisposition, we must combine what we know about the
potential adaptive behaviors in the selection history of the DRD4 with what we know
about the attentional differences of ADHD individuals with the 7R allele as compared to
those without the allele to suggest a dynamic description of the DRD4' s behavioral
profile. Simultaneously, we must assess how ADHD individuals appear to be interacting
with the environment in maladaptive or unusual ways. In this manner, we can hope to
suggest a preliminary outline of a diathesis-stress model for DRD4-related ADHD.
Two studies have been done on the attentional performance of ADHD individuals
with the 7R allele as compared to those without. Swanson et al. (2000) found that those
ADHD individuals with the 7R allele did not show the slowed cognitive responses typical
of non-7R ADHD. Rather, they appeared to be free of many of the common deficits
assumed to be part of ADHD. Langley et al. (2004), using different tasks, further
elaborated. Though she did find some deficits in accurate decision-making, she
confirmed that 7R ADHD individuals are characterized by faster reaction times than non7R ADHD individuals, and in her study, to controls as well. Together these studies are
consistent with aspects of the "response ready" model. Specifically, it appears that 7R
individuals give speed priority over accuracy. This could indicate that they have a

16

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

"scanning attention" that is designed to quickly process environmental stimuli, perhaps in
order to integrate as many aspects of their environment as possible in high-pressure
situations, at the cost of slow, but accurate decision-making. Essentially, this would
allow the 7R individual to "multitask", paying attention to multiple things at once (as
mentioned above, this could factor into a frequency-dependent model.)
There is some evidence to support the notion of multitasking. In one study
(Landau, Lorch et al. 1992), ADHD children were compared to controls in their attention
to television. After watching television with distractor toys present, the ADHD children
showed significant problems compared to controls in recalling the content of the show
they had watched when asked to simply report the shows content. Interestingly, when
investigators elicited cued recall (asking specific questions about the shows content),
ADHD children showed no deficit, indicating that they were paying attention to multiple
things at once, though at a less conscious level.
Given this evidence I suggest the following diathesis-stress model. The 7R and
2R alleles of the DRD4 gene code for an attentional cognition that is characterized by
quick, uncontrolled shifts of attention that give the individual the ability to pay attention
to multiple stimuli in their environment. This hypothesis is consistent with the genetic
evidence outlined above, and though I cannot provide a concrete frequency-dependent
selection model, I suggest that such a cognition could have been adaptive in a variety of
situations, and that the current evidence suggests that there may be multiple adaptive
niches. This hypothesis does not contradict the available data regarding the selection of
the DRD4, and it is consistent with our current understanding of7R attentional cognition.

17

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

This suggested cognition should currently be maladaptive in the form of a
predisposition to develop ADHD because our current environment demands a high
degree of selective and sustained attention, while simultaneously presents a degree of
environmental stimuli that is higher than at any point in our evolutionary history. A child
with 7R will have a difficult time attempting to sustain his attention in the classroom, or a
businessman will have a difficult time keeping staying on one task long enough to finish
it because he is distracted by the many other demands of the office place. Similarly,
television - presenting a constant stream of stimuli, should act as an environmental
stressor. And indeed, there is evidence that TV exposure can lead to attentional problems
(Christakis, Zinnnerman et al. 2004).
Though there are no concrete answers to the questions investigated in this paper,
the various lines of evidence are beginning to yield clues as to the evolutionary history
and current manifestation ofDRD4-related ADHD. With further neurological studies (of
the neurophysiological and neurochemical substrates of ADHD), genetic studies (of the
DRD4 as well as other candidate genes), cognitive studies (of the attetional components
of the various forms of ADHD), and evolutionary studies (of the populations for which
we have frequency data), we can begin to formulate a comprehensive and dynamic
picture of ADHD as a product of our evolutionary past, and a representation of our
current environment - a diathesis-stress model.

18

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

REFERENCES
Chang, F. M., J. R. Kidd, et al. (1996). "The world-wide distribution of allele frequencies
at the human dopamine D4 receptor locus." Hum Genet 98(1): 91-101.
Christakis, D. A, F. J. Zimmerman, et al. (2004). "Early television exposure and
subsequent attentional problems in children." Pediatrics 113(4): 708-13.
Ding, Y. C., H. C. Chi, et al. (2002). "Evidence of positive selection acting at the human
dopamine receptor D4 gene locus." Proc Natl Acad Sci US A 99(1): 309-14.
Faraone, S. V., A E. Doyle, et al. (2001). "Meta-analysis of the association between the
7-repeat allele of the dopamine D(4) receptor gene and attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder." Am J Psychiatry 158(7): 1052-7.
Harpending, H. and G. Cochran (2002). "In our genes." Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99(1 ):
10-2.
Landau, S., E. P. Lorch, et al. (1992). "Visual attention to and comprehension of
television in attention-deficit hyperactivity disordered and normal boys." Child
Dev 63(4): 928-37.
Langley, K., L. Marshall, et al. (2004). "Association of the dopamine D4 receptor gene 7repeat allele with neuropsychological test performance of children with ADHD."
Am J Psychiatry 161(1): 133-8.
Leung, P. W., C. C. Lee, et al. (2005). "Dopamine receptor D4 (DRD4) gene in Han
Chinese children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): increased
prevalence of the 2-repeat allele." Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet
133(1 ): 54-6.
Nieoullon, A (2002). "Dopamine and the regulation of cognition and attention." Prog
Neurobiol 67(1): 53-83.
Rogers, G., P. Joyce, et al. (2004). "Association of a duplicated repeat polymorphism in
the 5'-untranslated region of the DRD4 gene with novelty seeking." Am J Med
Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet 126(1 ): 95-8.
Shelley-Tremblay, J. F. and L. A Rosen (1996). "Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder:
an evolutionary perspective." J Genet P~chol 157(4): 443-53.
Swanson, J., F. X. Castellanos, et al. (1998). "Cognitive neuroscience of attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder and hyperkinetic disorder." Curr Opin Neurobiol 8(2): 26371.
Swanson, J., J. Oosterlaan, et al. (2000). "Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder children
with a 7-repeat allele of the dopamine receptor D4 gene have extreme behavior
but normal performance on critical neuropsychological tests of attention." Proc
Natl Acad Sci US A 97(9): 4754-9.
Wang, E., Y. C. Ding, et al. (2004). "The genetic architecture of selection at the human
dopamine receptor D4 (DRD4) gene locus." Am J Hum Genet 74(5): 931-44.
Wolraich, M. L., J. N. Hannah, et al. (1998). "Examination ofDSM-IV criteria for
attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder in a county-wide sample." J Dev Behav
Pediatr 19(3): 162-8.

19

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

Abstract
Objective: In this paper, I report the results of one preliminary, cross-cultural statistical analysis in which I
examine the effect of media-saturation in society on the development of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder (ADHD,) as a pilot study into an evolutionary model of the disorder. ADHD is marked by
hyperactivity/impulsivity and/or inattentive behavior, and is the most common childhood mental disorder at
about 5%. Research has poiuted to both genetic and environmental contributions, but there has been little
research into developing a comprehensive evolutionary model of ADHD. ADHD is associated with genetic
components maintained at high rates in the population, indicating that agpects of cognition relating to the
disorder were at one time adaptive, selected by the environment. I propose that many ADHD individuals
have an evolved form or forms of attention and memory processes that becomes maladaptive when the
amount of information and stimuli in the environment increases far enough beyond that of the environment
in which our cognitions evolved. The most obvious societal correlate of information complexity and the
degree of access to stimuli is the level of media saturation; therefore, media was chosen as a proxy for the
amount of information and stimuli in the environment. If the degree of information and stimuli available in
the environment is a significant predictor of ADHD, then in a given society, as the level of media in the
environment increases the prevalence of ADHD should also increase. One recent stody has shown that
exposure to television at a youug age is correlated with later attentional problems, indicating the
importance of television as an environmental factor in the development of ADHD, and supporting my
prediction. Methods: I directly tested my hypothesis nsing indicators of media saturation, as indexed by
the International Telecommnnication Union's Telecomm database oftelecommnnications indicators, and
worldwide prevalence rates from multiple independent studies compiled by Faraone (2003). Simple and
partial correlations, principle component analysis, and multiple regressions were performed on the
combined data set. Results: Analysis yielded near significant results, supporting the prediction that
television is associated with ADHD; however, every other indicator of media, showed weak to moderate
negative associations with ADHD. Also negatively correlated with ADHD was Gross Domestic Product
(GDP). Discussion: These results appear to rule out a simple a model of media's effect on ADHD that
excludes a consideration of different cultures' selection pressures on ADHD-like behavior. I propose three
explanations that may be valid: 1) There is a distinction between interactive media, such as the internet and
passive, non-interactive media, such as television, 2) Media and information in the environment do causally
influence the development of ADHD, as a disorder; however, cultures in which there is less media may also
happen to be cultures that, independently, do not demand the same level of attentive behavior as those
cultures in which there is more media. This might occur because in these low-media cultures there has
been less of a need to adapt to an excess of stimuli, and thus the ADHD-like behavior (which encouraged
attention to many digparate details) flourishes. Therefore, when American diagnostic criteria are applied to
these poorer, less media-saturated cultures, the more prevalent, yet benign ADHD-like behavior would
falsely appear as an increased prevalence of the disorder. This demands a distinction between ADHD as a
disorder specific to high-stimuli environments, and as an evolved, underlying behavior. We cannot apply
diagnostic criteria from stimuli rich environments to stimuli poor environments becanse the behavior is not
as maladaptive in stimuli poor environments; and, thongh the underlying behavior will be more prevalent,
those with the behavior cannot necessarily be considered as having a disorder on the basis of the DSM
criteria. 3) Television, as the ouly media variable found in every country, may be the only variable that
should be considered currently. Conclusion: I propose a theoretical framework in which to illnstrate the
various gene/environment interactions surrounding ADHD as a dynamic process, and explain the issues
that must be takeu into consideration when looking at ADHD across cultures. Future directions: Finally,
a platform for the development of an evolutionary model of ADHD is outlined to conclude the paper,
taking into consideration the results of this statistical analysis and proposing future directions for research.

21

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and the Media - An Evolutionary
Perspective
Understanding the evolutionary basis of a mental disorder is a process that yields
knowledge of what specific cultural and social factors of the environment are responsible
for the maladaptive behavior. A behavior is considered a disorder if it is both sufficiently
different from the norm and affects an individual's ability to function in society (DSMIV). Mental disorders that appear to have a genetic basis must have underlying behaviors
that were at one time both functional and adaptive to a portion of the population, else
those genes would never have become widespread in population. Attention-Deficit/
Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD,) like many mental disorders, is heritable (Swanson et al.,
2000), and as such must have an evolutionary history. The evolution of a heritable
disorder must be marked by two phases: 1) one during which the behavior must have
been adaptive for a long period of time to a certain percentage of the population an the
environment of evolutionary adaptiveness, and 2) the contemporary phase, in which
something in the environment has changed such that the evolved behavior has become
maladaptive in the form of a mental disorder. This paper is concerned with the
contemporary phase, addressing the issue of what environmental factors are at play in the
pathogenesis of ADHD, and discussing the possible role of known genetic contributions
in that pathogenesis.
One recent study has found that exposure to television at a young age can lead to
attentional problems (Christakis et al., 2004). I examine the relationship between ADHD
and media in the current environment, predicting a casual association consistent with

22

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

Christakis et al. (2004)' s findings. This statistical investigation is a pilot study, in which
I try to provide evidence to support a hypothetical evolutionary model of ADHD that
centers on the individual's ability to attend to and integrate informational stimuli. I
suggest that it would have been adaptive to have an impulse to integrate as much
information (or stimuli) as possible in any one moment (a "scanning" attention,) in order
to integrate and process more information about the environment in certain high-stimuli
situations in contrast. This is envisioned to be in contrast to the contemporary
environment in which high levels of stimuli are accompanied by societal demands for
selective focus (a "screening" attention.) In this paper I delay the question as to what
specific situations such cognition would have been adaptive in our evolutionary past.
Though this is an interesting question in its own right, it is enough for the present
purposes to recognize that current environments must be different such that certain
evolved genetic influences on cognition are now maladaptive. The focus of this paper
will be on the potential mechanisms at work in the cotemporary environment that are
currently placing selective pressures against those genetically predisposed to ADHD, and
those who display ADHD behavior.
The adaptive benefit of a "scanning attention'' should disappear if the amount of
information increases and the demand for selective focus simultaneously increases.
Today, it is adaptive to screen out as much extraneous information as possible - such as
in the classroom or the workplace (Jensen et al., 1997) - so an impulse to attend to
extraneous information should be maladaptive and socially dysfunctional. I specifically
examine what I believe to be the current selective environments in which available
informational stimuli is associated with ADHD. Evidence of this association provides a

23

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

platform for future research in which the current environmental forces at play in the
development of ADHD can be better understood, lending in turn to a future investigation
into the evolutionary history of those environmental interactions.
Currently, ADHD is clinically understood solely as a behavioral disorder. ADHD
is the most common mental disorder in the United States among children, and the
disorder often carries into adulthood. The primary behavioral symptoms used in the
clinical diagnosis of disorder are inattentiveness, overactivity and impulsiveness
(Sagvolden, et al., 2004).
Self report, teacher report and parent report are all methods employed by
clinicians in their diagnosis. Rating scales are often used - these focus on the behavior of
the patient in certain situations, such as the classroom or at home. The studies from
which we acquired the prevalence rates for the present statistical analysis employed any
or all of these methods. Such methods are designed to evaluate behavior in reference to
the standardized American criteria.
The current instrument most employed in the diagnosis of ADHD is the American
Psychological Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual IV (DSM-IV.) The DSMIV specifies three subgroups of ADHD: Inattentive, Hyperactive/Impulsive, and
Combined types. Attention deficit disorder is multifactorial in both its pathogenesis and
symptomology; however it is currently a disease defined by behavioral features, and there
has been little investigation into the underlying cognitive features of the disorder, and
hence no effort to redefine ADHD subgroups by cognitive or genetic features. To define
ADHD subgroups, it is necessary to understand how the environment affects the
pathogenesis of the disorder, and how neurological variation contributes.

24

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

The neurological evidence for ADHD centers around the function of the
neurotransmitter/neuromodulator dopamine. Investigation into dopamine function began
because of a history of success using psychomotor stimulants to treat ADHD symptoms.
Psychomotor stimulants are dopamine agonists, increasing the amount of dopamine
involved in neurotransmission. Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Electro
Studies support the idea that dopamine systems are hypofunctional in patients with
ADHD. Dopamine - both through direct regulation or modulation of other
neurotransmitter systems - is known to regulate important prefrontal activities such as
attention and memory, as well as motivation and response inhibition (Sagvolden, et al.,
2004). Though "it is undoubtedly too simplistic to assume that the genetic etiology of
ADHD is caused by abnormal dopamine transmission alone," (Kirley et al, 2002), it is
clear that certain dopamine-related genes are associated with ADHD.
Because of the obvious role of dopamine in the neurobiology of ADHD, the
studies investigating possible genetic factors have revolved around genes involved in
dopaminergic functions. Various genes have been studied. The DATl and the DRD4
genes show the most evidence of an association with ADHD (Swanson et al., 2000). The
DAT! gene codes for the dopamine transporter (Barr et al., 2001), but there is little
evidence ofa direct functional significance (Tannock, 1998). The DRD4 is one of the
genes that code for dopamine receptors.
The 7-repeat allele of the DRD4 gene has a well documented association with
ADHD (Faraone et al., 1999), (Kirley et al, 2002), (Swanson et al., 2000). There is an
increased frequency of the allele in ADHD populations relative to the general population,

25

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

and studies have linked the allele to specific cognitive features of the disorder (Swanson
et al., 2000)(Langley et al., 2004), as well a novelty seeking (Rogers et al., 2003).
The DRD4 gene may play a specific role in the attention of some of those with
ADHD, specifying a distinct subgroup (Swanson et al, 2000). llitimately, it will be
necessary to determine what the exact cognitive contributions of these two genes are (and
possibly other genes), in order to develop a comprehensive analysis of gene/environment
interactions that can lead to the clinical manifestation of the disorder. As will be
discussed, the gene that most likely contributes to a scanning attention ( as opposed to a
screening attention) is the DRD4, though this requires more research.
Besides a well-documented general association with ADHD, the 7-repeat allele of
the DRD4gene has been associated with certain specific behaviors and cognitive features.
The primary behavioral association, other than with ADHD, is with the personality trait
of novelty seeking. A few studies (Swanson et al., 2000)(Langley et al., 2004) have
attempted to examine the cognitive performance of those ADHD individuals with the
allele compared those without the allele. Swanson took a sample of combined-type
ADHD children with identical clinical symptomology, genotyped the sample, and
subjected the children to a suite ofneuropsychological tests of attention. Interestingly,
though the 7-repeat children displayed the exact same symptoms of those without the
allele, they performed equally well as controls on these attention tests. Langley, using a
different set of tests, indicated that those ADHD children with the allele showed
abnormally inaccurate and impulsive response that exceeded the non-7-repeat children.
Though this test showed inaccuracy, it is important to note that the 7-repeat children had
very rapid response times, which is consistent with Swanson's study, in which speed was

26

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

the primary cognitive feature assessed. In Swanson's study, those ADHD children
without the allele showed the slowed cognition that was expected from ADHD children,
based on current theory that attributes slowed executive functioning to ADHD. The 7repeat ADHD children did not display these response time deficits.
These findings are preliminary support for my hypothesis. In this model,
individuals with the 7-repeat allele represent those who have a hyperactive, scanning
attention that compels them to attend to multiple stimuli and react quickly. If this is true,
it would imply that those with the allele both have a measurably different manner of
attending to stimuli as well as integrating information. I suggest that the 7-repeat allele
may code for a cognition that allows individuals to have 1) better attention to multiple
stimuli at once, 2) worse to one stimuli in the presence of distractors, 3) and similar
attention to controls when attending to one stimuli without distractors present. If these
suggestions are true, it would explain why the 7-repeat allele of the DRD4 gene confers
risk for ADHD because it implies that those with the allele will have trouble focusing on
one thing in the presence of environmental distractors. This would be consistent of the
model I have set forth and attempted to test in this paper.
Thus, it appears that part of ADHD's onset stems from differences in evolved
attentional cognition, though the specific genetic contributions may vary between
individuals. I suggest that it is also possible for an individual to display ADHD-like
behavior without a distinct genetic contribution; however, the prevalence of such
individuals should quickly diminish as the demand for selective attention in a given
society increases. What these types of individuals share is reactivity to a common
environmental pressure ~ here hypothesized to be available stimuli. Regardless of

27

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

genotype, if the cognitive ability to selectively attend is poor enough while the demand
for selective attention is great, an individual could be clinically diagnosed as ADHD.
Research has shown that the developmental path of children is affected by stimuli
in the environment (Christakis at al., 2004), and that ADHD children attend to stimuli in
a different manner than normal children. Specifically, Christakis et al. show that preschool exposure to television is associated with later attention problems. In addition,
Landau et al. (1992) showed that ADHD children appear may attend to television less
well when distractor toys are present if gauged on a free-recall criteria, in which children
are requested to simply recount what happened. However, when asked specific questions
regarding the television show's content (cued-recall,) ADHD children performed equally
well as controls. Thus, it is not that ADHD children do not pay attention to details in
their environment; by contrast, some appear to pay close attention, though in a manner
distinct from normal children. Swanson et al. (2000) showed that ADHD children with
the 7-repeat allele of the DRD4 gene performed equally well as controls on certain tests
of attention, despite showing all outward clinical symptoms.
Evidence, therefore, shows that all individuals with ADHD have trouble
processing stimuli (the focus of this paper,) yet there may be discrete underlying
cognitive predispositions to the development of the disorder that have an evolutionary
basis. This could eventually lead to ADHD subgroups defined by genotype associated
with specific cognitions. Regardless of genotype and the underlying cognition of ADHD
individuals, I argue that all ADHD individuals are affected by the same environmental
pressure of excess stimuli, resulting in similar problems with selective attention, even
though clinical symptomology may not show differences between these hypothetical

28

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

subgroups. I will argue below that an evolutionary perspective could lead to a better
understanding of the various manifestations of ADHD and help resolve the debate over
diagnosis.
The prevalence of ADHD is disputed (Faraone et al., 2003). In this investigation,
the prevalence data for each nation is often hard to determine conclusively, because two
studies may report very divergent rates, though they use the same DSM criteria (such as
the DSM-N prevalence data for Brazil, in which Guardiola et al. (2000) reported 18%
and Rhode et al. (1999) reported 5.8%.) Furthermore, prevalence rates in countries other
than the US employ the American DSM criteria, which is not necessarily cross-culturally
sensitive. This raises the most important issue pertinent to this statistical analysis - not
only is the prevalence disputed within the countries, but the application of the DSM
across cultures demands reevaluation because national studies, such as those analyzed
here, have used American diagnostic criteria in nations with distinctly different cultures.
I hope to use an evolutionary perspective to explain the fallibility of these cross-cultural
DSM studies, and in doing so, shed new light on our concept of ADHD as a behavior and

a disorder.
This paper will first report my statistical investigation pertinent to the proposal
that the most important current selective force on ADHD is the amount of available
information in the environment - in which I correlate levels of media saturation with
prevalence of ADHD. Prevalence rate studies were representative of individual nations
and were grouped into three categories, each based on one of the three relevant versions
of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, designed in the United States. These three sets
were combined to maximize statistical power. It is unlikely that differences between

29

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

ADHD criteria in different DSM versions had a significant impact on prevalence rates. If
the effect of media is large, we should see some positive associations.
Issues that must be raised include cultural factors such as attitudes toward ADHD
behavior, the cross-cultural applicability of the DSM criteria, the manner in which other
forms of media may differ from television in their effect on ADHD and their degree of
presence in individual cultures, and the difficult question as to what distinguishes a
behavior from a disorder and how this distinction holds across cultures. A discussion of
culture and the genetic contributions to ADHD will help clarify the state of these issues
and direct future research efforts into ADHD as a behavior and a disorder across cultures.
In the conclusion I will summarize my findings and suggest the implications of
the present research. Following the conclusion, I will suggest a platform from which an
evolutionary model of ADHD should be investigated, discussing the current state of
knowledge, and the implications of the present analysis. I will outline the directions that
future research should take, emphasizing the importance of evolutionary thinking in the
development of genetic subgroups of ADHD.
Method
The data on prevalence rates were taken from a variety of ADHD international
population studies - compiled by Fareone (2003) - covering a twenty year period from
1981 to 2002. These studies are representative of the three versions of diagnostic criteria
that have been used by the American Psychological Association's "Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual" (DSM) since ADHD was added as a disorder. In chronological order,
these three sets of diagnostic criteria are found in the following editions of the DSM:
DSM-Ill, DSM-ill-R, and DSM-IV. For each DSM set, there was multiple prevalence

30

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

rates reported, both within and between studies. Some studies reported one prevalence
rate whereas others reported multiple. Those that reported multiple rates, did so
according to either the instrument or the method of diagnosis used (i.e. "teacher",
"parent", "functional impairment").
A discussion regarding the controversy over prevalence rates is not addressed in
this article, and in the absence of an existing resolution to this debate, I felt that it was
appropriate to average prevalence rates both within and among studies to attain a single
datum point for as many nations as possible. For the studies with multiple reported rates,

I averaged the prevalence rates using weighted means to generate a single prevalence rate
for each study. When multiple studies were available for a single country, I attained a
weighted mean in a similar manner. Thus I generated a single national statistic for each
nation for each DSM set.
For each DSM set, population studies from a variety of nations were available and
analyses were performed for each DSM set. The weighted-mean prevalence rates for
each set of studies were not consistent, nor were the ranges of prevalence: the DSM-III
reported a mean ofS.51% with a range of5.2% to 16.6%, the DSM-lll-R reported a mean
rate of 5.49% with a range of3% to 14.4%, the DSM-IV reported a rate of 10.67% with a
range of3.7% to 16.43%. This suggests that the set of diagnostic criteria used does not
have a significant affect on the prevalence reported, and that combining the sets is a the
most appropriate technique given the paucity of datum points within each DSM set.
Though interesting results were found individually for each set, the number of
nations was too few to make firm assertions. Thus I combined these sets. When a

31

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

particular nation appeared in more than one set, I again generated a weighted average.
This combined set was used for the final analysis. ( see table 1)

Country
Australia*

Brazil*
Columbia*
Iceland
Ukraine
Finland
Israel
Italy
Japan
New Zealand

Spain*
China
Hong Kong
United Kingdom
SWEDEN**
CANADA**
GERMANY**
NETHERLANDS**
US**

ADHD prevalence (% pop)
7.1
9.7
16.4
5.2
19.8
3.6
3.9
3.9
7.7
2.9
7.1
5.8
6.1
16.6
4.0
5.8
10.8
2.6
7.7

(Mean: 7.831 95% Cl: 5.56-10.10)
*weighted average from multiple studies within a DSM set
"'"weighted average from multiple studies across DSM sets

TABLE 1: Summary - ADHD prevalence by Country

Media and relevant population statistics were taken from ITU. These statistics
cover a variety of national media indicators, such as numbers of TVs and personal
computers in a nation. Important demographic indicators, such a gross national product
and population, were also compiled from ITU in order to assess any confounding
variables. Media and demographic data were compiled for each country for which
ADHD prevalence rates were available, for the year prior to an individual ADHD study
(to address publication lag time.) The same weighting system described earlier was
applied to media data, first creating weighted averages for single studies, then for each

32

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

nation both within and among DSM sets. For each DSM set and for the compiled set,
per capita data were generated for each media variable.
All data were logarithmically transformationed.
There was a significant degree of variation in both ADHD prevalence data and
media data. We performed a battery of statistical tests to determine whether the variation
of any one or more media variables explained any of the variation in ADHD prevalence
across countries.
Correlations between log-transformed media variables with ADHD prevalence
were calculated. Principle component analysis was also performed to determine whether
the media variables could be reduced to a smaller number of dimensions. In addition,
similar analyses were performed after controlling for Gross Domestic Product (GDP),
allowing inference without the influence of monetary capital.
To control for GDP, I used the residuals from linear regressions of each variable n
log GDP. By correlating these residuals, partial correlations were thereby generated for
both media and ADHD prevalence data for which the effects of GDP were removed.
Pairwise correlations were first performed to assess any single variable effects.
Principle component analysis was then performed with and without prevalence, in order
to identify multiple variable dimensional effects. Finally, multiple regressions were
performed to assess any multiple variable effects.

Results
Simple Pearson correlations between log-transformed prevalence, media, and
GDP variables, before controlling for GDP, showed a negative correlation between Gross
Domestic Product and ADHD prevalence, r = -.4166, p<.0676 N=l9. When an outlier,

33

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

China, was removed because of the country's relatively extremely low GDP, the strength
of this correlation increased significantly, r = -.5804, p<.01 N=18. (see figure. 1)

1.3--------------1.2
1.1
1

>

[o.9

~

0)0.8
0
-0.7
0.6
0.5

..

0.4-+--....---.-----.----.----.--......-"---....---1
4.5
3.5
4
3
log GDP per cap

FIGURE 1: Prevalence by Gross Domestic Product.

Except for TVs per capita and TV equipped households per capita, which showed no
correlation, all media variables showed negative correlations with ADHD prevalence.
Many showed weak significance, except cable TV subscribers per capita, which had a
negative correlation, r = -.5381, p<.05 N= 13. Moderate negative correlations were found
with telecommunications equipment per capita, r = -.46198, p< .1 N=15, and personal
computers per capita, r = -.4158, p<.1 N=18. (see table 2)
Variable

by Variable

Correlation Count

-o.4166
-0.5381

20
14 0.0676
0.0471 c;;;;~~;;;~;;;;;;;;;~
. . . ._ _ ..___ _.._____

-0.3083
-0.3718
-0.2872
-0.4684
-0.4158
-0.4618
-0.0569
-0.0461

11 o.3563 ::::======I==J:==========:i

Log GDP per cap
log cable tv subscribers
percap
log home satellite
log sdprev
antennas per cap
Log internet hosts per cap
log sdprev
-0.2348
Log internet users per cap
log sdprev
log mobile comm. rev. per
log sdprev
cap
log ISDN subscribers per
log sdprev
cap
log personal computers
log sdprev
per cap
log telecom. equip. export
log sdprev
percap
log TV equipped
log sdprev
households per cap
log sdprev
Log tvs per cap
TABLE 2: Pairwise Correlations - Media Variables to ADHD Prevalence.

log sdprev
log sdprev

Signif Plot Corr
Prob

34

12 0.1245 c====-:::=.==='.J.==========i
19 0.0766 c=========::::i:==========:i
16 0.0718 ::::==========:::;:=========::::::i
19 0.8169 c::::=:=:==:EJc::::========i
20 0.8471 ::::::=========E=========::J

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

Factor analysis of the media variables and GDP showed that the first principle
component explained 67.31 % of the total variance. There were relatively similar
loadings across all variables, indicating that this third component represents a general
media and GDP dimension. This component showed a moderate negative correlation
with ADHD, r = -.589, p<. l N=S. (see table 3)
Eigenvalue
Percent
Cum Percent
Eigenvectors
log GDP per cap
log cable tv subscribers per
cap
log home satellite antennas
percap
log internet hosts per cap
log internet users per cap

log ISDN channels per cap
log mobile comm. rev. per
cap
log ISDN subscribers per cap
log personal computers per
cap
log telecom. equip. export per
cap
log TV equipped households
percap
log tvs per cap

1st Principle t
7.8812
65.6766
65.6766

0.22774
0.34404
0.19957
0.29889
0.32544
0.33727
0.33727
0.32242
0.29542
0.23473
0.29819
0.17870

TABLE 3: First Principle Component summary statistics and components, showing a general "media/ GDP"
dimension.

Partial correlations between ADHD prevalence and media after controlling for
GDP are shown in table 4. These Pearson correlations indicated once again that media
variables are negatively correlated with ADHD prevalence, except TVs per capita, r=
.4239, p<.07 N=l9, and TV equipped households per capita, r = .3658, p<.13 N=l8, both
of which are correlated positively with ADHD, consistent with the general hypothesis.
All other media variables were weakly correlated except cable TV subscribers per capita,
which showed a moderate negative correlation, r = -.3865, p<0.18 N=l3.
Regarding the TVs per capita correlation, two outliers at the extremes ends of prevalence
and TVs per capita (China and the Ukraine) heavily affect the correlation; however, these

35

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

two outliers are not validly excluded because they confirm the positive trend that weakly
exists without them. Without them the correlation is less significant, but does not
disappear. (see figure. 2, 3)

Variable

by Variable

Residuals log
sdprev
Residuals log
sdprev
Residuals log
sdprev
Residuals log
sdprev
Residuals log
sdprev
Residuals log
sdprev
Residuals log
sdprev
Residuals log
sdprev
Residuals log
sdprev
Residuals log
sdprev

Residuals log cable tv
subscribers per cap
Residuals log home satellite
antennas per cap
Residuals log internet hosts per
cap
Residuals log internet users per
cap
Residuals log mobile comm. rev.
per cap
Residuals log ISDN subscribers
per cap
Residuals log personal
computers per cap
Residuals log telecom. equip.
export per cap
Residuals log TV equipped
households per cap
Residuals log tvs per cap

Correlation Count

Signif Plot Corr
Prob

-0.3865

14

0.1722

0.0393

11

0.9088

-0.2112

19

0.3853

-0.0652

19

0.7910

-0.1780

12

0 .5800

-0.3207

12

0.3095

-0.0453

19

0.8539

-0.1668

16

0.5369

0.3658

19

0.1235

0.4239

20

0.0625

TABLE 4: Pairwise Correlations: Media Variables to ADHD Prevalence after controlling for GDP.

0.4

-0.44---~-~--~-~-------l
.6
.4
0
.2
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
Residuals log tvs per cap

FIGURE 2: TVs per capita to ADHD prevalence with outliers

36

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

0.5-.----------------,
0.4> 0.3!!!
0.2-

f

~

~

0.1-

0-~ - ~

- - - - _ : . . - --:-- - -

~ -0.1 Q)

a:: -0.2- .
-0.3-0.4
J
I
I
-0.2 -0.15 -0.1 -0.05

I

I

0

.05

I

.1
Residuals log tvs per cap

7

.15

.2

FIGURE 3: TVs per capita to ADHD prevalence without outliers

Factor analysis of the media variables showed no principle components with
significant correlation with ADHD prevalence, however including ADHD prevalence
into the factor analysis with the media variables did produce a sixth principle component
for which ADHD prevalence loaded highly, along with internet hosts per capita and,
negatively, mobile communications revenue per capita. While not conclusive, this
suggested that there might be an important association between these three variables. A
multiple regression was therefore performed correlating internet hosts per capita and
mobile communications revenue per capita with ADHD prevalence, producing a near
significant prediction, r2=.47, F(2,11) = 3.94, p<.06, adjusted r2=_349_ Individually,
internet hosts per capita in a stepwise regression contributed. t=-2.71, p<.03, and
contributed 36% in shared variability with the ADHD prevalence.

Discussion
Though the results of this analysis indicate a negative correlation of ADHD
prevalence with media indicators, I will argue that the results support the hypothesis that
media should affect the prevalence of ADHD, though my predictions were based on too

37

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

simple a model. I will propose three possible explanations of the data. The first is based
on the idea that there are two categories of media - interactive and non-interactive - that
have opposite effects on the prevalence of ADHD. The second is based on a critical
distinction that must be made between ADHD-like behavior and ADHD as a disorder,
and that prevalence rates generated by the DSM criteria may falsely diagnose ADHD as a
disorder in nations where ADHD-like behavior is not maladaptive due to a paucity of
media and stimuli. In these nations, ADHD-like behavior is allowed to flourish and
should be more prevalent, though classification as a disorder may be inappropriate. The
third assumes that television (being the only variable that is found in every country) is the
only media variable that might be viable for the present analysis. I will then propose
possible explanations that reject the hypothesis.
This study represents a cross-cultural correlation of the amount of available
information and stimuli in the environment with prevalence of ADHD. I proposed that if
media served as a good proxy for the amount of available stimuli and information in the
environment, then rates of ADHD prevalence should vary with rates of media exposure
regionally in a positive direction. An increased relative level of media exposure should
correlate with an increased relative prevalence of ADHD in a specific region. The
analysis that did not control for GDP showed a relationship between media exposure and
the prevalence of ADHD, though it was mostly negative, rejecting my prediction except
with regard to television, which showed no correlation. After controlling for GDP, most
media variables still showed negative association except for two TV variables (TVs per
capita and television households per capita), which were positively associated. Two
outliers affected the strength of the association between TVs per capita and ADHD

38

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

prevalence; however, these outliers confirm the trend and there is no justification for
excluding them.
These results suggest that the initial predictions were based on a model of ADHD
across cultures that may have been too simple. The results reveal important potential
factors at play in the cross-cultural study of ADHD.
Explanations supporting the hypothesis
l) Though most media variables were negatively correlated with ADHD
prevalence, televisions per capita and television equipped households per capita were
positively correlated when controlling for GDP. There could thus be an important
distinction between different forms of media - that of interactive versus that of passive,
non-interactive. Christakis et al.'s (2004) study directly points to the potential of
television to affect attention problems. Other evidence shows that environmental stimuli
is important in the development of ADHD in individuals (Jensen et al., 1997). But there
is some evidence that interactive media, -specifically per-sonal computers, can have the
opposite effect, effectively relieving the symptoms of those with ADHD (Jen-sen et al.,
1997). Some have even suggested using computers as an educational technique or as
form of therapy for ADHD children (Rizzo et al., 2000). If this distinction exists, then
the original hypothesis might still apply, but with a caveat: a greater degree of stimuli in
the environment with which the individual does not interact should correlate with an
increased prevalence of ADHD. Therefore, ADHD prevalence should positively
correlate with television (which is not particularly interactive), but other media indicators
(that are interactive) should correlate negatively. This hypothesis is in fact supported in

39

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

the present analysis by the strong negative correlation found with internet hosts, when
multiple regression was applied.
2) A second explanation that is conditionally mutually-exclusive (see below)
with the first lies in the distinction between ADHD as a disorder and as a behavior, and
how this distinction holds across cultures. Important to this argument is the observation
that ADHD prevalence is negatively correlated with Gross Domestic Product.
Furthermore, every media indicator except TV's per capita and TV equipped households
per capita are also negatively correlated with ADHD prevalence, even after controlling
for GDP. This raises the question: why do countries that are poorer and have fewer
media appear to have a greater prevalence of ADHD? Clearly, this goes against the
simple hypothesis that increasing media saturation causes increasing ADHD. The answer
probably lies in assessing the cross-cultural applicability of the DSM in the context of
selection pressures on attention. One must consider how the level of stimuli effects both
the prevalence of ADHD-like behavior and whether such behavior will be considered a
disorder in a given culture, given the specific demands that environmental stimuli places
on the individual.
The national studies from which ADHD prevalence data were drawn using the
DSM criteria do not give a appropriate assessment of the prevalence of ADHD as a
disorder, especially for less media-saturated societies. Rather, what appears to be an
increased ADHD prevalence in poorer, less media-saturated societies, is actually a
indication of an increased level of ADHD-like behavior. The DSM criteria are applied
even to cultures in which there is less stimuli in the environment, and therefore, less
societal demands on the attention of the individual. This raises the question of whether or

40

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

not these less-mediated cultures have allowed the ADHD-like behavior to flourish, as it
might not be maladaptive to have less selective attention in an environment with less
available stimuli. American diagnostic criteria are designed to assess whether ADHDlike behavior is maladaptive, but simply assume that this behavior occurs in a stimuli rich
environment, where the demand for an ability to selectively attend in the presence of
stimuli is great. The DSM criteria fails to make the critical culturally-contingent
distinction between ADHD as a behavior and as a disorder. The DSM simply assumes
that if the behaviors are displayed, the patient has ADHD; however, certain cultures may
have different social requirements for selective attention, and a patient who is considered
to have a disorder in America may be well adapted to another culture with less demand
for selective attention. ADHD-like behavior - whether it is directly related to genetics or
not - is more prevalent in less-mediated environments, but prevalence data generated
with the DSM criteria gives false positives, as many individuals with the behavior may
not be considered as having a disorder in a particular cultural environment.
This is an important concept in the development of an evolutionary model of
ADHD, because it suggests that although the evolved behavior exists everywhere, it is
less prevalent in those high-stimuli societies where individuals have been forced to adapt
to stimuli rich environments via selective attention. I suggest that when thinking about
ADHD-like behavior and genetics, we must make a distinction between those who are
genetically predisposed toward "inattentive behavior'', and those who display the
behavior without a genetic predisposition. In high-stimuli societies (such as the US),
those individuals who are the most genetically predisposed to inattentive behavior are
maladaptive, and are labeled with the disorder ADHD. Other individuals who are not as

41

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

genetically predisposed toward attentional problems should display ADHD-like behavior
in stimuli-poor environments because the behavior is not maladaptive; however,
inattentive behavior found in those not genetically predisposed should vanish in stimulirich environments because there is not a genetic predisposition hindering their ability to
adapt.
Thus, the prevalence of inattentive behavior should diminish as the level of
stimuli increases, but those who still display the behavior are more likely genetically
predisposed. It is in stimuli-rich environments, where the selection pressures for
selective attention are great, that those with the strongest evolved genetic predisposition
for scanning (vs. selective) attention become maladaptive. Hence, this second
explanation predicts that the true disorder (as opposed to the benign behavior) is not only
more likely to occur in high-stimuli environments where the behavior is maladaptive, but
it is also more likely to be the result of a maladaptive phenotype of an evolved attentional
genotype because those not genetically predisposed have adapted. The behavior (as
opposed to the maladaptive disorder) should be more likely to occur in stimuli-poor
environments, and will be falsely deemed a disorder if diagnosed with criteria from a
high-stimuli culture, yielding an increased prevalence rate as compared with high-stimuli
environments. Furthermore, it is in these stimuli-poor environments in which we may be
able to better understand why the behavior may be adaptive.
It is important to note that, after controlling for GDP, televisions per capita and

TV equipped households per capita are positively correlated with ADHD prevalence,
supporting the original prediction and Christakis' finding. Television, of all forms of
media, is found in the most number of countries of any media variable, and is quite

42

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

ubiquitous (see figure 4) except for China. The positive correlations weaken when
outliers are removed, it is true, yet they remain positive. This supports the first
explanation - that interactive and non-interactive media have divergent effects on ADHD
prevalence~ however, it is in contradiction with the second explanation - that a distinction
must exist between ADHD as a behavior and a disorder, because television should also
negatively correlate with the ADHD prevalence along with the other media data.
Thus, these two explanations are conditionally mutually exclusive, with GDP as
the condition. GDP is negatively correlated with ADHD prevalence. Both explanations
can only be true if controlling for GDP removes a degree of the cultural effects on the
prevalence of the behavior. Then we can explain why the most universal form of media
correlates positively with prevalence when those effects are diminished. The relatively
strong negative correlation with GDP makes this a viable possibility.

3

2

15

a:
~

'El1I

::,

0

1

ni

0

z

E
0

-1

-2
-3
--0.6

--0.5

--0.4

--0.3

--0.2

--0.1

FIGURE 4 : Quartile plot showing distribution of televisions per capita without the outlier (China).

3) Finally, a third simple explanation exists. Many of the media variables are not
found in every country, and the correlations are rather weak, though negative. Only

43

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

television is found in every country. It could also be argued that because of its
universality, television is the only media factor that can be considered for the original
prediction, because it affects all societies. In this case, the original hypothesis is
confirmed. This explanation is mutually exclusive with the first explanation and
conditionally mutually exclusive with the second, just as the first, with GDP as the
condition.
Alternative interpretations and considerations
Another issue regarding the cross-cultural applicability of the DSM concerns
cultural attitudes toward ADHD-like behavior. This is in contrast to stimuli-determined
cultural demands discussed in the second explanation above. The same concept of false
positives as described above in the second explanation may apply, but with a different
underlying reason. (For this interpretation, we need to again remember the distinction
between those who are genetically predisposed toward "inattentive behavior'', and those
who display the behavior without a genetic predisposition.) American culture may
simply value selective attention more than poorer countries independently of the fact that
it is also a stimuli rich environment. It could be that poorer, low stimuli countries value
selective attention less for cultural reasons other than that they have excess stimuli.
Whereas earlier I suggested that high-stimuli societies value selective attention because
of the adaptive need to ignore greater amounts of extraneous information, here I suggest
that that value system may operate independently of a cultures level of stimuli and may
be more of a reflection of GDP or other factors that may correlate with media data giving the appearance that media is the cause when it may be a "side effect". A variety
of possible explanations exist. Perhaps, because poorer countries (which have less media

44

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

investment) have less money for education and less corporate professional vocations two activities that demand a high level of selective attention - this may lead their cultures
to value attention less. In these countries, ADHD-like behavior might flourish regardless
of genotype, leading in tum to a higher prevalence when the DSM is applied, just as in
the second explanation from the previous section.
Different cultures may simply value ADHD behavior differently, and therefore
the DSM would have to be discounted as an instrument to diagnose a disorder since it
merely measures levels of behavior without regard to the possibility that the culture
might value it. The results could be considered weak (as applied to the original
hypothesis) and the high variability in prevalence data could be seen as representing the
idea that ADHD is simply not cross-culturally applicable as a disorder or a behavior.
Problems with the data
There are potential problems with the validity of the data - particularly ADHD
prevalence data. The present study suggests that a reappraisal of the data is necessary,
and identifies important issues concerning how this type of data should be investigated in
the future. In addition, the following concerns must be considered.
As mentioned previously, the data were drawn from studies that employed three

sets of diagnostic criteria. It is not clear which version of the DSM gives the most
accurate assessment. The DSM criteria are very consistent across versions, with the
biggest difference being that the DSM-N includes a few new subtypes of the disorder.
The extent to which combining the sets may be inappropriate simply cannot be properly
assessed at present. As more data are collected with the newest criteria in a wider array
of countries, the patterns suggested here might become clarified.

45

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

The prevalence rate of ADHD is highly contested. Even within the US, the
country for which the DSM was designed, there is a wide disparity of reported rates from
national studies, indicating that the disorder itselfis difficult to define, and even more
difficult to observe. For example, within single studies, teacher reported rates are
consistently higher than parent or doctor reports.
These problems with prevalence data are compounded by the use of multiple
studies by different researchers. Each study employs it own protocol, and is performed
by a different group of researchers; however, the DSM is designed to limit this problem.
The present study generated weighted averages for each country taking sample size into
account, which gives a best estimate for each country for which multiple studies were
available. However, it is clear that some variation in incidence of ADHD is due to these
sampling factors.
Optimally, one would prefer data collected in a single cross-cultural, comparative
study that employs a standardized protocol to multiple nations. No such study exists.
The present study calls into question the extent to which DSM criteria have cross-cultural
validity, and more research on this question is needed.
The two main areas of potential inaccuracy among diagnoses are: 1) The vector of
implementation (i.e. teacher v. parent v. doctor,) affects the probability of a diagnosis.
For example, teacher-report rates are consistently higher than parent-report rates. 2)
There are cultural differences in the subjective implementation of the diagnostic criteria.
In addition to the above explanations, there are a variety of ways - other than media that cultural differences may affect the cross- cultural applicability of the DSM, such as

46

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

differences in the value a particular culture places on education, differences in threshold
of accepted behavior regarding aggressiveness, hyperactivity, etc ...
Lastly, because the ADHD studies span nearly 20 years, the media data is also
compiled from a broad timescale. This impacts the validity of the data because media,
especially internet, has grown rapidly during the past twenty years, making the combined
data set a poor technique of comparing media indicators. For many countries, media data
were not available for certain indicators, reducing the power of many of our statistical
analyses.

Conclusions
ADHD, regardless of genotype, is a disorder related to one's cognitive ability to
process environmental stimuli, defined by a dynamic threshold - the amount of stimuli
that can be processed is directly proportional to the corresponding social demands for a
high level of selective attention.
An increase in the amount of available stimuli is what I propose to be the
environmental factor that has begun to affect variants of the DRD4 gene in a maladaptive
manner, predisposing an individual to ADHD. ADHD is a mental disorder that may have
many genetic components and is also largely dependent on an individual's developmental
progression. Though our model specifically addresses the cognitive features of the
DRD4 gene, I suggest that available stimuli is the environmental factor that is causing
ADHD in general, regardless of an individual's genotype. The forms of ADHD that are
not associated with the DRD4 gene are also failing to functionally process too much
available stimuli, though in different manner, which has not yet been thoroughly
investigated. Thus, regardless of genotype, I suggest that certain individuals have a

47

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

threshold that limits the amount of available stimuli they can process effectively. The
same environmental pressure has different effects on different genotypes but results in
similar maladaptive behaviors, all of which we describe as ADHD.
There are more available stimuli in the current environment than in the
environment in which these behaviors evolved, and the current social environment often
demands sustained, selective and focused attention, i.e. in a classroom. The reason the
current environment demands selective attention may be a direct result of the increasing
amount of stimuli available, creating a selection pressure against those who have a
scanning hyperactive attention. A scanning attention in the presence of so many
distracters, given the social requirement of selective attention, should be maladaptive, and
lead to the clinical symptoms of ADHD.
The statistical analysis reported in this paper attempts to test this hypothesis by
assessing the strength of the associations between ADHD prevalence and environmental
stimuli, using measures of media saturation as a proxy. The results of this analysis are
not conclusive, yet they do not reject the hypothesis. These results also suggest that there
are currently weaknesses in the data that may be due to theoretical flaws in the crosscultural application of the DSM criteria.
There are three alternative explanations for the data that support my model. The
positive association between ADHD prevalence and television (controlling for GDP)
directly confirms my prediction, and the negative association with all other forms of
media may be due to a distinction between interactive and non-interactive stimuli. There
is evidence to support the validity of this distinction and it is potentially consistent with
my model, as those with the 7-repeat allele of the DRD4 gene should excel in situations

48

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

that require interaction with multiple stimuli simultaneously. More research is needed to
classify this distinction between forms of stimuli.
A second explanation for the results, conditionally mutually exclusive with the
first, suggests the importance of another distinction that must be made when looking at
the environmental interaction with ADHD-like cognition - that between ADHD-like
behavior and ADHD as a disorder. If this explanation is valid, then care must be taken
when looking at the presence of ADHD in other cultures because though the basic
behaviors may be more prevalent, they might not be maladaptive or a problem, and will
be falsely identified as such if diagnostic criteria from a stimuli-rich environment is used.
Such criteria then, by definition, cannot be cross-culturally applied. This explanation
emphasizes the selection forces against ADHD-like behavior in stimuli-rich
environments, which in tum implies that stimuli-rich environments are those in which
genetically predisposed individuals are more likely to develop a maladaptive disorder,
though the behavior itself should be less prevalent. If this explanation is correct, it
reinforces the idea that genetically influenced ADHD is contingent upon a high-stimuli
environment in which there is a correspondingly high demand on the individual for
selective focus.
A third explanation assumes no distinction between forms of media and no
cultural influences on diagnosis rates. This explanation assumes that television, being the
only media indicator found in every country analyzed, is the only viable indicator of
media's effect. Here, television data would provide a direct support for the original
prediction.

49

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

I hope to emphasize the importance of an evolutionary perspective when
investigating mental disorder in general. Such a viewpoint directly addresses tbe
importance of our changing environment for mental health, as our evolved
cognitions are increasingly encountering novel environmental pressures for which
we were not designed.
Platform for future research directions
Thought there are many areas available for investigation into ADHD and the
environment, I will outline the directions that I plan to take regarding the development of
an evolutionary model of ADHD. There are a variety of research directions that will help
clarify both the genetic contribution of the DRD4 gene to ADHD and the environmental
factors at play in the etiology of the disorder, regardless of genotype.
I will discuss the issues and questions surrounding future research of two issues:
1) the DRD4's evolutionary history and its contribution to a predisposition for ADHD,
and 2) the current environmental factors at play with the pathogenesis of ADHD,
proposing various cognitive subgroups of ADHD, one of which is that of the DRD4. I
hope to place the results of this statistical analysis, in the context of this research, into the
development of a dynamic evolutionary model, and outline the implications of this model
for a better understanding of ADHD as a disorder.
Background: past selection of the DRD4 gene
Worldwide frequency studies of the DRD4 alleles have shown great variation
between populations in the frequency of the alleles. In every population, the 4-repeat
allele is the most common, and can be considered the normal variant of the gene. Though
most of the other alleles are relatively rare, two variants show clear signs of positive

50

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

selection: the 7-repeat (7R) allele and the 2-repeat (2R) allele (Ding et al., 2002). Both
these variants are found to be maintained at rates above the mutation rate, indicating that
there must have been an adaptive benefit to these genes. Because dopaminergic functions
clearly affect behavior and cognition, we can assume that these low-frequency alleles are
coding for an adaptive phenotype that is behavioral because of doparnine's cognitive
effects. This evidence poses the question: For what adaptive behavior or behaviors are
these alleles responsible?
To answer this question we must piece together the evidence regarding the
selection of these alleles with knowledge of the alleles' contribution to behavior.
Worldwide frequencies of the various DRD4 alleles in ethnic populations have been
documented. Most focus has been on the 7-repeat allele because it is both the second
most prevalent allele (after the common 4-repeat allele), and it is known to have certain
behavioral associations, such as with ADHD and novelty seeking. The 7R frequencies
range from 0% to over 50% of the population (Chang et al, 1996). This is clear evidence
of positive selection. Two hypotheses have been suggested to explain the variation.
Chen et al. (1999) have proposed that the 7R behavior helped those in migratory
enviromnents. This hypothesis attributes the frequency variation to worldwide
population spread. This hypothesis seems to fit with a model in which the gene codes for
an attentional cognition defined by a scanning, "multitasking" quality because such a
cognition could easily be seen as adaptive in an environment that consistently presents
high-pressure, high-stimuli situations (without the cultural demand for selective focus.)
However, this hypothesis does not seem to account for frequency-dependent selection.
Though the 7-repeat allele was not necessarily selected in a frequency-dependent fashion,

51

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

the consistently low frequencies imply that there should be some enviromnental or social
factor restricting the highest frequency that can be maintained in a population
Harpending et al. (2002) suggest an alternative hypothesis that attributes the
variation in 7R frequencies to the adaptive benefit of 7R behavior in Cad societies. In
these societies, which Harpending refers to as "local anarchy societies," there is a high
degree of male-to-male competition, loose familial ties and competition among siblings
due to a level of uncertainty as to paternity. Though this hypothesis is appealing because
it accounts for a frequency-dependent selection model, it more speculative than
theoretically sound. First, there is no clear connection to ADHD symptomology and
clinical or cognitive evidence; rather there is just intuition regarding ADHD personality
traits. Second, though he supports his speculation with evidence regarding the frequency
distribution among ethnic populations, his theory falls apart if the 2-repeat allele is
considered to have a similar contribution to ADHD.
I suggest that both hypotheses are incomplete, and that neither explanation is
specific enough to account for the attentional cognitive features that the 7R allele
contributes to behavior, and that now contributes to the development of ADHD. Both
hypotheses may give a clue to the greater picture, but a full explanation requires a greater
understanding of the exact cognitive contributions of the gene. Furthermore, there is
evidence that the 2-repeat allele may contribute to attentional cognition in a similar
manner (Leung et al., 2004). Not only does this undermine previous frequency analyses
among populations, such as Harpending' s, but because these two alleles may occupy the
same selective niche, future research may need to take 2-repeat frequencies into account.
The most important consideration in the development of a model for past selection is the

52

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

broad range of behaviors that are affected by dopamine function. It is very possible that a
single model of selection cannot be applied to all populations, as the cognitive
contributions of the gene should manifest as modifications to a range of behaviors.
Thus, despite clear evidence of positive selection, there may be a large variety of
behavioral niches that define this selection history, and only a better understanding of
attention and genetics will allow fruitful investigation into this area.
Data mining analysis
To address the question of what pressures selected for the 7-repeat and 2-repeat
alleles of the DRD4 gene, I will perform data mining in an attempt to identify cultural
patterns consistent with the available frequency data in ethnic populations. I will employ
cultural anthropological databases. This method is valid because the allele frequencies
appear to be the result of relatively recent selection. If possible, I would also like to
correlate frequency data with media or other proxies for stimuli across regions. This is
difficult because the available genetic frequency data is specific to ethnic populations,
whereas the media data are for countries/regions without respect to ethnic divisions.
Another proxy for stimuli may be necessary.
Media survey
Addressing the initial question of whether media can illustrate an environmental
interaction with genes that results in ADHD, I have designed a survey on media usage to
test whether there is any difference at all between ADHD and controls. Though this
survey does not adequately address a causal relationship, it does help answer the question
as to whether ADHD individuals interact with media differently. It will also help clarify
whether there a distinction should be made between interactive and non-interactive

53

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

media. It is important to better research the types of stimuli that effect different types

ADHD individuals.
Attention experiments with genotyping
I am also planning a series of attention experiments with genotyping to investigate
the specific contributions of the 7-repeat allele to cognition. This information is essential
to an understanding of the genes interaction with the environment, and thus crucial in the
development of a comprehensive evolutionary model. Specifically, I will perform
experiments designed to gauge the number of stimuli that an individual can attend to
simultaneously. I will also introduce a temporal component with distractors to determine
whether how this cognition holds or is disintegrated by intrusive stimuli. I believe that
those with the allele will attend to more stimuli better than controls, but that they may be
affected by any introduced distractors because their attention will quickly shift away from
the initial load of multiple stimuli. This too will help better our understanding of the
specific stimuli/cognition interactions effecting different types of ADHD individuals.

54

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

Rogers, G. et al. (2003) Association of a duplicated repeat polymorphism in the 5 ' untranslated region of the DRD4 gene with novelty seeking. American Journal of
Medical Genetics, 126(B), 95-98.
Rizzo, A et al. (2000) The virtual classroom: a virtual reality environment for the
assessment and rehabilitation of Attention Deficits. Cyber Psychology & Behavior, 3,
483-499.
Sagvolden, T., Johansen, E., Aese, H. and Russell, V. (2004) A dynamic developmental
theory of Attention-Deficit/ Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) predominantly
hyperactive/impulsive and combined subtypes. Behavioral and Brain Sciences (in press).
Swanson, J. et al. (2000) Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder children with a 7-repeat
allele of the dopamine receptor D4 gene have extreme behavior but normal performance
on critical neuropsychological tests of attention. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 97, 4754-4759.
Swanson, J. et al. (2000) Dopamine genes and ADHD. Neuroscience and Behavioral
Reviews, 24, 21-25.
Tannock, R. (1998) Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: Advances in cognitive,
neurobiological, and genetic research. J. Child Psycho!. Psychiat., 39(1), 65-99.

56

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

APPENDIX: STATISTICS
(FOR ORIGINAL RAW DATA SET, CONSULT FILE "ADHDstat")
Descriptives Of Log-transformed Media Variables per capita and GDP per capita
Gross Domestic Product
Mean
Std Dev
Std Err Mean
upper 95% Mean
lower 95% Mean
N

4.0554341
0.5519265
0.1234145
4.3137437
3.7971246
20

Cable TV Subscribers
Mean
Std Dev
Std Err Mean
upper 95% Mean
lower 95% Mean

N

-1.371744
0.7713262
0.2061456
-0.926393
-1.817094
14

Home Satellite Antennas
Mean
Std Dev
Std Err Mean
upper 95% Mean

lower 95% Mean
N

-2.021599
0.6844153
0.2666612
-1.42744
-2.615757
11

Internet Hosts
Mean
Std Dev

Std Err Mean
upper 95% Mean
lower 95% Mean
N

-2.615096
1.0920208
0.2505268
-2.066759
-3.141434
19

Internet Users
Mean
Std Dev
Std Err Mean
upper 95% Mean
lower 95% Mean
N

-1.801523
0.9004105
0.2065683
-1.367539
-2.235507
19

ISDN Channels
Mean
Std Dev
Std Err Mean
upper 95% Mean

lower 95% Mean
N

-2.355533
1.0906735
0.3636245
-1.517014
-3.194053
9

57

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

Mobile Communications Revenue
Mean
Std Dev
Std Err Mean
upper 95% Mean
lower 95% Mean
N

-2.140084
1.0359207
0.2990445
-1.481891
-2.798276
12

ISDN Subscribers
Mean
Std Dev
Std Err Mean
upper 95% Mean
lower 95% Mean
N

-1.818252
1.904577
0.549804
-0.608142
-3.028363
12

Personal Computers
Mean
Std Dev
Std Err Mean
upper 95% Mean
lower 95% Mean
N

-0.727734
0.6913947
0.1586168
-0.394492
-1.060975
19

Telecommunications Equipment Export
Mean
Std Dev
Std Err Mean
upper 95% Mean
lower 95% Mean
N

1.4201799
0.9492915
0.2373229
1.9260217
0.9143382
16

TV Equipped Households
Mean
Std Dev
Std Err Mean
upper 95% Mean
lower 95% Mean
N

-0.57615
0.27 40791
0.0628781
-0.444048
-0.708252
19

Televisions
Mean

Std Dev
Std Err Mean
upper 95% Mean
lower 95% Mean
N

58

-0.394972
0.3000784
0.0670996
-0.254531
-0.535413
20

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

means within and between studies
Pprev Tprev SBprev PSprev SMprev Flprev

2.4

9.9

8.8
7.5

15.8
4.7

5.7

16.1

59

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

DSM-ID-R: ADHD Prevalence data and sources, including weighted means within
and between studies
Pprev Tprev SBprev PSprev SMprev Flpr
5
8.9
3.3
0.6
6.6
10.9
3.9
3.9
7.7
1.3
1.8
2.8
3

14.4
5.3
3

7.08332
4

9.9

1992
1993

.

1995.
1995
1995 

11

26

. . . ...... .
4.5

Shaffer

V\/otra,cti 

*original studies reported by Faraone et al. (2003)

60

2.2

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

DSM-ID: ADHD Prevalence data and sources, including weighted means within and
between studies
PTprev Pprev Tprev SBprev PSprev SMprev Flprev

... 4982. ... King
.
1994
Newborn

8
12

*original studies reported by Faraone et al (2003)

61

18
4

2

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

Ongoing Research Efforts
ADHD and the Media Survey
This study is an extension of the research that began with the second article in this
thesis, "Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and the Media - An
Evolutionary Perspective," and is driven by the hypothesis that exposure to media may be
an important aspect of the mental environment that predisposes one to the development
of ADHD. Despite the mixed results of the previous article, this questionnaire task
would be a more direct way to correlate media use and ADHD prevalence, a finding that
is supported by other research. This questionnaire task has been approved by the
Institutional Review Board of the University of Pennsylvania for the next two years, and
will be implemented in an online format within that duration. The content of the survey
is as follows:

Questionnaire for ADHD AND THE MEDIA STIJDY
1) How many hours of TV do you watch a day

2) How often do you switch channels?
Never < I 2 3 4 5 6 7 > always
3) Do you usually watch a show from beginning to end?
Never< I 2 3 4 5 6 ?>always
4) How much time do you usually spend watching TV in one sitting?

5) How many channels do you have available?
7) Please list the top three channels you watch most regolarly and indicate the percentage
of time that you estimate you watch to each one.
1-

23-

8) Do you usually watch TV while you do schoolwork?
Never< l 2 3 4 5 6 7 > Frequently

62

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

How much do you feel you have trouble doing multiple activities at once?
How much do you like doing multiple activities at once.
26) Do you have Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)?
YIN





Please list the top three careers that appeal to you
What is your sex
What is your race
How old are you

64

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

The Attentional Cognition of ADHD Subjects and the DRD4 Gene
Overview and Fnnding
This is a very large project that involves multiple experimenters and facilities, and
is expected to be complete within 2 years. Part of the project is funded by the prestigious
undergraduate Nassau research grant, part of it is funded by the ADHD Research and
Treatment Program in the Department of Psychiatry at the University of Pennsylvania,
and part of it is funded by the Laboratory of Molecular Anthropology in the Department
of Biology at the University of Pennsylvania. The goal is twofold: 1) To administer a
battery of working memory and attention tasks to ADHD subjects from all three accepted
diagnostic subgroups and one subgroup that is currently being defined. In addition to
across-group analysis for all ADHD subjects, between group analysis will reveal whether
specific attentional profiles correlate to distinct subgroups. 2) To then genotype all
subjects who give consent to reveal whether specific attentional profiles correlate with
diagnostic subgroups and/or genotypes (specifically the 2-repeat and the 7-repeat alleles
of the DRD4 dopamine receptor gene).

Experimenters
Two IRB approved protocols - one for the behavioral testing of an ADHD
clinical population and a separate one for the genotyping of those subjects - are guiding
this study. The Principal Investigator for the administration of the behavioral tasks to
ADHD subjects is Dr. Anthony Rostain, Director of the ADHD Treatment and Research
Program (ADHD-TRP) at the University of Pennsylvania. The Principal Investigator of
the genotyping is Dr. Theodore Schurr of the Department of Anthropology at the
University of Pennsylvania. Supporting investigators are Dr. Russell Ramsay of the

65

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

ADHD Research and Treatment Program, Amishi P. Jha of the Center for Cognitive
Neuroscience in the Department of Psychology at the University of Pennsylvania, and
myself, Erik Malmgren-Samuel, undergraduate in Biological Anthropology,
Communications and Psychology at the University of Pennsylvania.

Method
The study will consist of two phases, corresponding to the two protocol:
behavioral testing and genotyping.
Phase 1:
The ADHD-TRP will recruit ADHD subjects through their clinic, and run them
through a battery of diagnostic tasks, designed to rule out false positives, and to assign
each subjects to one of four behavioral subgroups (the three DSM-IV-TR subgroups:
Hyperactive, Inattentive, and Combined; and an experimental subgroup specific to the
ADHD-TRP, called "disorganized"). Once informed consent is approved, subjects will
be run through a battery of various working-memory and attention behavioral tasks,
administered with a computer. Exhaustive statistical analyses will be performed to reveal
any correlations between indices of working memory/attention and the diagnostic
subgroups.
Phase 2:
Over the course of the behavioral testing, self-administered cheek swabs will be
obtained from all subjects who give their informed consent. These samples will be
preserved until all samples are collect. The samples will then be genotyped by Dr. Schurr
of the Laboratory of Molecular Anthropology for the presence of either the 2-repeat
and/or the 7-repeat alleles of the DRD4 dopamine receptor gene. Statistical analysis will

66

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

then be performed to reveal any significant relationships with the analysis from Phase 1,
correlating genotypes with diagnostic subgroups and their performance profiles from the
attention and working memory tasks.

67

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

The Role of ADHD-like Symptoms in Serial Order and Novelty in
Working Memory and Attention (working paper- still in analysis stage)
Overview
This experiment, conducted over the course of the 2005-2006 academic year, was
performed on normal subjects, and consisted of a simple delayed-recognition working
memory task that was designed to probe the intersection between two theoretical
concepts: 1) that of serial order recognition, and 2) that of attentional capture. To serve
as a proxy for ADHD, subjects took the Conners' Adult ADHD Rating Scale (CAARS),
which was then correlated with various indices of task performance, to see if - in the
general population - the continuum of ADHD-like cognition can show distinct
directionality with these specific attentional tasks. Preliminary results indicate that there
are significant correlations between task measures and CAARS scores for both serial
order effects and capture effects. As the paper is a working manuscript, below is
presented only the raw Methods and Results with appropriate figures and tables. The
manuscript will be completed and submitted for publication within the end of the year
(2006).
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Subjects
45 University of Pennsylvania undergraduates were recruited as participants,
using the Experimetrix online scheduling system. Students participated for partial
fulfillment of credit in introductory psychology courses. Informed consent was obtained
from all participants, in accordance with the protocol, which was approved by the
University of Pennsylvania's Institutional Review Board. One participant's data was

68

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

excluded from analysis due to significantly slower response times from the rest of the
subjects, leaving 44 participants. (n=44). 25 participants were female and 19 were male.
Participants ranged in age from 17 to 22 years, with a mean age of 18.77. The only
exclusion criterion was that the participants could not have a diagnosis of Attention
Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD).
Experimental Task

This experiment consists of a novel working memory task design, created with E-Prime
software, using a delayed-response design in which all stimuli were visual, all responses
were either left or right index finger button presses, and in which stimulus duration and
timing were identical. Subjects had to remember a sequence ofletters. Subjects were
presented with a cue image (hereafter referred to as CUE), followed by three memory
items (pairs ofletters) in sequence (hereafter referred to as Sla, Slb, Slc), and finally a
test image of three letters (hereafter referred to as S2), in which the subjects had to
indicate whether the three letters of the test image matched the cued sequence ofletters
from the memory items by pressing either a button for match or another for non-match.
Two manipulations were introduced: 1) the absence or presence of information in the
CUE image - "Sequence" or "No Sequence", and 2) the absence or presence of novel
colors in selected letters from each S 1 letter pair - "Neutral", "Target Novelty", or
"Distractor Novelty".
The S 1 items consisted of three images presented in sequence, with delays after
each in which no stimulus was presented except for a central fixation cross (a cross in the
center of the screen to which the subject was instructed to maintain his attention.) Each
SI image was either a pair ofletters in the "Sequence" conditions, or a pair of one letter

69

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

and one ampersand in the "No Sequence" conditions. These pairs were arranged to the
left and the right of another central fixation cross.
The CUE image consisted of three pairs of circles, each surrounding a cross ( one
to the left and one to the right of the cross.) These pairs were stacked, and corresponded
(from top to bottom) to each of the three following Sl images in sequence (from the first
to the third). There were two types of cue images. In the "No Sequence" trials, the cue
circles were empty. In "No Sequence" trials, subjects had to remember the "Target"
letters presented, ignoring the ampersands, and respond as to whether the S2 test image
contained the three "Target" letters in the appropriate order. In the "Sequence"
conditions, one circle in each pair of the CUE was filled in with an asterisk. Depending
on which side an asterisk appeared, it indicated to the subject which letter (either the left
or the right) of each S 1 letter pair is the "Target" letter that he should attend to and
remember. The subject must therefore ignore the other "Distractor" letter. Just as in the
"No Sequence" conditions, the subject then had to respond as to whether the three letters
in the S2 image were the "Target'' letters in the correct order (left to right).
The novelty manipulation consisted of introducing randomized novel colors into
either the "Target'' letters or the "Distractor" letters or ampersands. When no color was
introduced, the trial was considered a "Neutral" trial, and all S 1 letters were black. To
amplify the effect of color novelty, task-irrelevant black crosses appeared above and
below all S 1 images.
In each trial, the CUE was presented for 1500 ms, followed by a delay (D 1)
consisting of a fixation cross located centrally in the screen for a randomized variable
duration of 500 to 1000 ms. S la was then presented for 1000 ms, followed by another

70

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

variable-duration delay (D2) of500-1000 ms. Sib and Sic were also 1000 ms, and the
following delays (D3 and D4) were also variable between 500 and 1000 ms. S2 was
presented for 1500 ms (see Figure IA and Figure lB). An inter-trial interval (ITI) of
variable duration (2000-3000ms) was presented at the end of each trial and consisted only
of the same centrally located cross as in the earlier delays.
- - - - - - - - - - i n s e r t Figures IA and lB about h e r e - - - - - - - - The experiment consisted of 5 runs, each with 48 trials. The sequence and the
novelty manipulations comprised a 2X3 design with 6 trial types that were equally
represented and randomly presented across the 5 runs.
Subjects were seated in a closed room, with dim lights, positioned 57.3 cm from
the monitor. They were instructed to keep one finger on each of the two buttons
indicated for "match" and "non-match".
Accuracy and response time (RT) were recorded.

The Conners' Adult ADHD Rating Scale (CAARS)
The CAARS questionnaire was administered to all subjects following the
behavioral task. The thirty-item instrument used was the self-report screening version of
the CAARS. The CAAARS measures indices of ADHD-like behavioral measures. Two
of the CAARS subscales (subscales A and B) measure the degree to which an individual
possesses ADHD-like behaviors for both of the two major symptom clusters of ADHD
(inattention and hyperactivity, respectively) used by the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual IV-TR (DSM-IV-TR). The third subscale (C) measures the combination of
subscales A and B. The fourth subscale (D) measures the "ADHD Index", an index used
to by clinicians to help determine whether an individual warrants a diagnosis of ADHD.

71

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

Data analysis
Mean accuracy (percent correct) was computed, though no further accuracy
analyses were computed due to near perfect accuracy. Response times (RTs) measures
from all subjects were entered into repeated measures analysis of variance (ANO VA)
tests to determine the influence of experimental condition. Paired sample T-tests were
calculated to compare means between Sequence conditions, both within each Novelty
condition and when Novelty conditions were collapsed. Paired sample T-tests were
calculated to compare means between Novelty conditions, both within each Sequence
condition and when Sequence conditions were collapsed. Difference scores were
calculated to compare conditions within both manipulations, both when conditions of
either manipulation were collapsed, and within each condition.
CAARS scores were transformed into Profile Scores to normalize for age and sex.
These profile scores were then correlated with RT difference scores.

RESULTS
Behavioral Results
One subject was excluded due to significantly slower response times, leaving N

=

44 subjects. Response times (RTs) and accuracy were recorded; however, because
accuracy was near perfect (mean= .98), all analyses were performed for RTs only. To
investigate main effects of our two independent variables, a two-way ANOVA was run
with 2 factors: Sequence (2 levels: Sequence and No Sequence) and Novelty (3 levels:
Distractor, Neutral and Target). The results of this ANOVA revealed a significant main
effect of Sequence [F(l,43) = 12.645, p < .001], no main effect ofNovelty [F(2,42) =

72

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

.014, p < .99], and a significant interaction effect between Sequence and Novelty [F(2,42)
= 7.774, p < .001].
Paired sample T-tests of raw RTs revealed a significant difference between
Sequence (mean= 676ms) and No Sequence (mean= 69lms) [T(l,43) = -.3556, p <
.001], when Novelty was collapsed (see Figure 2). This trend continued when Sequence
means were compared within the Distractor Novelty and the Neutral Novelty conditions,
but not for the Target Novelty condition. There was no significant difference between
Distractor Novelty and Target Novelty when the Sequence condition was collapsed;
however, in the No Sequence condition, there was a significant difference between
Distractor Novelty (mean= 698ms) and Target Novelty (mean= 682ms), [T(l,43) =
2. 71, p < .01] (see Figure 3). In the Sequence condition, there was a significant
difference between Distractor Novelty (mean= 668ms) and Target Novelty (mean=
685ms), [T(l,43) = -2.264, p < .05] (see Figure 3-altemate).
- - - - - - - - - - i n s e r t Figure 2 about h e r  e - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - i n s e r t Figure 3 AND 4 about h e r e - - - - - -

CAARS Correlations
When Novelty was collapsed, the Sequence difference score correlated with
CAARS profile scores for subscales A, B and C. Within Distractor Novelty, the
Sequence difference score correlated with subscales A and C. Within Neutral Novelty,
the Sequence difference did not correlate with the CAARS. Within Target Novelty, the
Sequence difference score correlated with subscales B and C.
When Sequence was collapsed, the Novelty difference score correlated with
CAARS profile scores for subscale B. Within the Sequence condition, the Novelty

73

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

difference score correlated with CAARS profile scores for subscale B. Within the No
Sequence condition, the Novelty difference score was not correlated with any CAARS
profile scores. (see Table 1)
-----------1insert Table 1 about h e r e - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

TABLE LEGENDS
Table 1. Correlation (r-values) between difference scores and CAARS subscale profile
scores. CAARS A and B profile scores were correlated with the Sequence difference
scores when Novelty was collapsed. CAARS C profile scores were significantly
correlated with Sequence difference scores when Novelty was collapsed, as well as in the
Distractor Novelty and Target Novelty conditions, but not in the Neutral Novelty
condition. CAARS A profile score was correlated with Distractor Novelty, and CAARS
B profile score was correlated with Target Novelty.

FIGURE LEGENDS
Figure 1. (A) Depicts design of a No Sequence trial, including the trial timing for all
stimuli. (B) Depicts design of a Sequence trial, including the trial timing for all stimuli.

Figure 2. Depicts mean RTs for No Sequence and Sequence trials when Novelty was
collapsed.

Figure 3. Depicts mean RTs for Distractor Novelty and Target Novelty trials in the No
Sequence condition.

Figure 4. Depicts mean RTs for Distractor Novelty and Target Novelty trials in the
Sequence condition.
[FIGURES AND TABLES PRESENTED IN THE FOLLOWING PAGES]

74

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Figure 1 A

No Sequence

l

O+O

\

z o+o

CUE(1500 ms)

\

a o+o

llstractor

-

+

D2 (500-1000ms)

\
+ ---'-__._____ \

++++
&+ p-

Target Letier

S1b{1000ms)

+

D3{500-1000ms}

+ +++

~c{1000ms)

L ,:t....0<__1._.,
+

'\

-

D4 (500-100Dms)

.-'---'-~

\

u~,_,1,_-()-K~l-52 Test Image
(1500 ms)

No Sequence Trial

~

FIGURE la
Figure 1 B

Sequence

1 \ >+O \ '\

I2: j -0 +-@

j- CUE{1500 ms)

L~T

1

\
-

D1 (500-1000ms)

\
-

Target Letter
llistractor Letter

D2{500-1000ms)

: ++ +
P+K

~b{1000ms)

\

+

-

03 {500-1000ms)

++++
M +J
+

\

-S1c(1000ms)

'\

-

+

D4 {500-1000ms)

\

LJ~--~J-S2 Test Image
M Q

K

{1500 ms)

~

Sequence Trial
FIGURE lb

75

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006
Figure 2

P<.001

705
700
., 695
.,s 690

Mean =691

Mean =676

" 685
E
i= 680

m 675
.,&. 670

l

665
660
655
650

===-------~~<-----L_-~

_j___ _ _ _

No Sequence Cue

Sequence Cue

Malmgren-Samuel & Jha

FIGURE2
Figure 3

P<.01

730
'ji,

E

Mean =698

720

Mean =682

.,

E 710

i=

.,"
.,8.
C

&!

700
690
680
670
Distractor Novelty

Target Novelty

Malmgren-Samuel & Jha

FIGURE3

76

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Figure 4

P<.05

700

Me111=685

T

690
Mean =668

680
670
660
650
640

Target Novelty

Distractor Novelty
Malmgren-Sanuel & Jha

FIGURE4

Table 1

A

Difference Score

Condition

Sequence - No Sequence

Collapsed Novelty
Distract Novelty

-.386"
__ 354

Neutral Novelty

-.136
-.230

Target Novelty

Distract - Target

Collapsed Sequence
Sequence
No Sequence

.047
.089
-.028

CAARS Profile Scores
C
8
-.304*

-.404-

-.157
-.112

-.326*

-.325*

-.336*
-.306"

-.165

-.161
-.303..

-.018
.049
-.013
-.069

-.106
-.063
-.091

.017
-.043
.074

* indicates a significance of p < .05
"'* indicates a significance of p < .01

Malmgren-Samuel & Jha

TABLE 1

77

D

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

General Discussion
In the present thesis I have attempted to demonstrate that an evolutionary vantage
can be used to better understand the etiology mental disorders by guiding the
development of research questions, regardless of what methodologies are used and
regardless of under what discipline the research is operating. Methods that have been
used and/or are being used currently are meta-analysis, review discussion,
attention/working memory attention behavioral tasks and genotyping. Disciplines in
which these investigations have been or are being conducted are Psychology, Biological
and Molecular Anthropology, Neuropsychology and Psychiatry.
The sum of the research presented in this thesis provides a genuine example of
interdisciplinary research, using scientists and methods from different fields. However,
an overarching emphasis on generating research questions via an evolutionary vantage is
maintained throughout. Interdisciplinary research is increasingly being employed in the
sciences, and as the lines between the academic disciplines begin to blur, models of how
to integrate and how to develop better communication between different fields of thought
is of critical importance.
Perhaps the research in the present paper can contribute to the development of
such a model, specifically for mental disorders with genetic components, such as ADHD.
Until now, most research into the genetic bases of mental disorders has been restricted to
identifying candidate genes for disorders. There has been little research into how these
candidate genes express phenotypes of clinical relevance. Much of this is due to the fact
that - in most cases - there is no single gene cause for mental disorders. I hope that I
have demonstrated that a valuable approach for the future of investigations into the

78

Evolution and ADHD
HONORS THESIS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY

Erik Malmgren-Samuel
graduating in May, 2006

genetic components of mental disorders is to use both an evolutionary approach
theoretically, and to employ a variety of methods and disciplines to investigate those
questions.

An evolutionary approach can generate research questions about specific genetic
contributions to mental disorders by asking placing candidate genes in the context of
predispositions that arise because once adaptive mental processes are now encountering a
novel mental environment in which the phenotype has become maladaptive. From this
vantage, we can not only hope to better understand the etiology of disorders, but to also
develop clinical treatments based on the concept that those who are genetically
predisposed to developing a complex mental disorder can avoid such an outcome if
proper mechanisms are employed to cope with the mental environment during
development. Similarly, those with the disorders already can develop behavioral and
cognitive coping mechanisms to deal with mental disorder in everyday life.

79

