Anthropology Senior Theses

University of Pennsylvania

ScholarlyCommons
Department of Anthropology

Spring 2006

Frostbite and the Skeletal Remains of Native Alaskans
Emilie Zoltick
University of Pennsylvania

Follow this and additional works at: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses

Q

Part of the Anthropology Commons

Recommended Citation
Zoltick, Emilie, "Frostbite and the Skeletal Remains of Native Alaskans" (2006). Anthropology Senior
Theses. Paper 66.

This paper is posted at ScholarlyCommons. https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/66
For more information, please contact repository@pobox.upenn.edu.

Frostbite and the Skeletal Remains of Native Alaskans
Disciplines
Anthropology

This thesis or dissertation is available at ScholarlyCommons: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/66

Frostbite and the Skeletal Remains of Native Alaskans

Emilie Zoltick
Anthropology Senior Thesis
Friday, May 5, 2006

Abstract

A collection of Native Alaskan remains from Point Barrow, Alaska is currently
housed at the University of Pennsylvauia Museum of Archaeology aud Anthropology.
The collection was examined for evidence of frostbite to the bones of the hauds and feet
based on radiographic frostbite damage that has been found in present populations and
paleopathologically. Bones of the hands and feet were present for a total of four
individuals. However, the collection is incomplete. There was one possible finding of
frostbite, which is thought to be au underepresentation of the frostbite injuries that most
likely occurred in the living population. A number of possible reasons for the lack of
frostbite findings are explored.

Zoltick 2
ethnographic items can be seen in the University of Pennsylvania Museum of
Archaeology and Anthropology's gallery on Alaska's Native People (University of
Pennsylvania Museum, 2002). The skeletal collection includes approximately twentyfive crania and postcranial as well. The majority of the materials are skeletonized.
However, some contain partially mummified matter, such as skin, cartilage, hair, and
even brain matter. The focus of this research was on the bones of the hands and feet for
signs of frostbite, and those that were present were completely skeletonized. Studies of
frostbite in European populations, have shown that the hands and feet are the most
vulnerable to frostbite injury (Murphy et al., 2000). In addition, other paleopathologic
instances of frostbite have been found in these areas, particularly in the feet (Post and
Donner, 1972; Murphy et al., 2003).
The degree of frostbite injury depends on the degree of cold exposure that an
individual is subjected to, which is the result of the temperature and the amount of time
that the tissue is frozen (Murphy et al., 2000). As the temperature of the tissue begins to
decrease, the flow of blood decreases as well until the cool blood from the cooling tissue
threatens the core body temperature (Rabold, 2004). Frostbite develops when the
temperature of tissues falls below zero degrees centigrade (Danz!, 2005). The damage is
due to the formation of ice crystals in the extracellular space which distort and destroy
the cellular architecture by puncturing the cell membranes (Bednar, 2003). An osmotic
gradient is produced, which results in cell dehydration. During this time the body
alternates between constriction and dilation of the blood vessels in the affected area in
response to the injury, but this leads to a partial thawing and refreezing which causes a
great deal of damage to the tissue (Murphy et al., 2000; Littell, 1952). At this point,

Zoltick I
Point Barrow, Alaska, the northernmost point of the United States located on the
Arctic Ocean, was named in the 1800s for Sir John Barrow, the second Secretary of the
British Admiralty and a supporter of exploration of the Arctic (State of Alaska, 2006;
Point Barrow, 2006). However, the area is known as Ukpeagvik, meaning "Place Where
Owls Are Hunted", to the Inupiat who continue to make up the majority of the
inhabitants. The area has a long and rich history, with archaeological sites suggesting
habitation dating back to the time between 500 and 900 A.C.E. Due to the climatic
conditions and extensive historical habitation, the skeletal remains of Native Alaskans
from Point Barrow which are currently housed at the University of Pennsylvania Museum
of Archaeology and Anthropology were analyzed for evidence of frostbite injuries.
Point Barrow is located approximately ten miles north of Barrow, Alaska, which
takes its name from Point Barrow (State of Alaska, 2006). Figure I in the appendix
shows the location of Barrow, Alaska. This area is located on the coast of the Chukchi
Sea, which is free of ice from mid-June through October with light precipitation.
However, due to the arctic climate, the weather is frigid with the daily minimum
temperature falling below the freezing point for 324 days of the year. The cold season of
Alaska is not unchanging, but goes through a number of stages that each affect the
ecosystem differently (Olsson et al., 2003).
The collection currently at the University Museum includes the skeletal remains
of Native Alaskans from Point Barrow. The collection includes both ethnographic items
and skeletal remains. It was accumulated by Edward Avery Mcllhenny in 1897 and 1898
with additional findings by William Blair Van Valen in 1917 and Arthur Hopson in 1929
(Hawkes, 1916; University of Pennsylvania Museum, 2004). A number of the

Zoltick 3
blood flow to the coldest area is terminated to maintain the core body temperature.
Vascular complications will arise once the vascular endothelium is damaged, often by the
formation of a clot (Danz!, 2005). When the tissues thaw there usually is a decrease in
the blood supply to the area along with arteriovenous shunting. The result of this is an
increase in tissue pressure and swelling of the area. Necrosis can appear and
mummification may develop over time.
Frostbite injuries are graded as either superficial or deep (Bednar, 2003). Only
the skin is involved in superficial frostbite and the injury often heals. Swelling,
blistering, and discoloration are often seen in these cases (Edwards and Leeper, 1952).
Deep frostbite, on the other hand, involves damage to both the skin and the subcutaneous
structures, like bone. However, the damage cannot be assessed until after rewarming of
the tissue has occurred (Murphy et al., 2000). In addition, the full extent of the damage
caused by frostbite may not initially appear, but can take weeks or months to develop
(Rabold, 2004). The most severe damage is usually distal (Rabold, 2004; Murphy et al.,
2000; Tishler, 1972). Infection can be a likely complication. In addition, gangrene can
occur which may require amputation or result in autoamputation (Littell, 1952).
For evidence of frostbite in the Native Alaskan collection, bone damage, and
therefore deep frostbite injuries, would have had to occur. Radiographic studies of
modern populations and paleopathologic cases demonstrate the bone changes that can
occur. The majority of the bone damage involves the distal phalanges and rarely involves
the metacarpals or metatarsals (Selke, 1969; Murphy et al., 2000). The damage seen in
the radiographs depends on a number of factors. First of all, it depends on the degree of
the cold exposure (Bednar, 2003). Secondly, it depends on the age of the individual at

Zoltick 4
the time of the frostbite injury, as adult and children's bones respond differently due to
the different stages of development. Finally, the amount of time that has elapsed since
the injury occurred has an effect, as bone and joint changes can take time to develop
(Tishler, 1972).
No evidence of bone damage is seen immediately after a frostbite injury, even if
the injury is extremely severe (Tishler, 1972). Intermediate changes are seen a number of
weeks to a number of months after the initial frostbite injury. This is characterized by
demineralization of the affected bones, especially in the areas where the soft tissue
damage is the most severe (Dreyfuss and Glimcher, 1955). Long-term changes can take
months to years to develop and vary from person to person, but often involve areas of
increased density of bone (Tishler, 1972; Carrera et al., 1979).
The characteristic damage seen when frostbite occurs during childhood is due to
these individuals being skeletally immature, in which case the epiphyses of the
phalanges, metacarpals, and metatarsals have not yet fused (Bednar, 2003). For this
reason, fragmentation and destruction of the epiphyses are common late bone changes
and some cases show complete absence of epiphyses (Murphy et al., 2000; Selke, 1969).
In addition, epiphyses can prematurely fuse (Carrera et al., 1979). Both damaging results
can lead to arrested growth and shortened or deformed digits. Furthermore, these bone
damages can lead to deformities of the articular surfaces (Thelander, 1950; Tishler,
1972). Arthritis can often be seen as a result of injury to the developing subchondral
bone, usually between the distal and intermediate phalanges (Carrera et al., 1979;
Solomon, 1980). Roughened diaphyses and clinodactyly have been noted as well
(Thelander, 1950; Carrera et al., 1979). The majority of the injuries seen in case studies

Zoltick 5
involves the distal phalanges and is usually asymmetric with the damage not heing
equally extensive for all digits of the frostbitten area due to differences in the severity of
the cold exposure. Furthermore, the epiphyseal bone changes are specific to children
because the bones are immature. However, additional bone changes are seen in both
adults and children.
A variety of bone changes can be seen in frostbite injuries and are associated with
arthritis due to the damage (Dreyfuss and Glimcher, 1955). Punch-out areas of bone are
often found at the phalangeal joint surfaces. In addition, joint-space narrowing, bony
fusions, and marginal spurs have been noted in case reports (Ellis et al., 1969; Tishler,
1972). Finally, bone damage can occur as a result of infection and gangrene (Post and
Donner, 1972). The result is often seen as destruction and reabsorption of the distal
phalanges, which can appear pointed. More extensive destruction of phalanges can
develop as well.
The previous bone damages associated with frostbite were all determined in
radiographs of living individuals in present populations. However, paleopathology has
revealed similar bone changes which have been associated with frostbite. The first case
involves a pre-Columbian mummy discovered in Chile (Post and Donner, 1972).
Radiographic studies showed loss of the distal and intermediate phalanges of the feet
with further phalangeal destruction, as well as bony fusion of the fifth metatarsal and
proximal phalanx due to gangrene, infection, and arthritis from the frostbite injury. In
addition, bone changes due to frostbite were seen in an approximately 5,000 year old
frozen mummy found in the Tyrolean Alps, and commonly known as Otzi or the iceman
(Murphy et al., 2003). A punched out area and formation of a spur on the fifth

Zoltick 6
intermediate phalanx were indications of osteoarthritis due to a frostbite injury because
only one digit was affected.
The aforementioned cases of frostbite were limited to the more distal bones of the
hands and feet without the presence of any bone damage to the carpals or the tarsals. For
this reason, in the examination of the Native Alaskan skeletal remains, the focus was on
the phalanges, metacarpals, and metatarsals. In the collection, the bones of the hands and
feet were present for four individuals, identified as numbers 29-80-144, 5429, 5863, and
17340. The collection did not include the complete skeleton for any of these individuals.
In addition, all of the bones of the digits were not present, with the majority of the
missing bones being those that are more distal. Therefore, the research could only be
based on the bones that were present in the collection.
The estimated age and sex of each individual was determined. The main
reasoning behind the collection of this information is based on findings from current
cases of frostbite. However, these findings may be comparable to older populations.
First of all, it has been found that the majority of frostbite cases in the present occur in
individuals who are between 30 and 49 years of age (Murphy et al., 2000). Secondly,
males lend to outnumber females in sustaining frostbite injuries (Murphy et al., 2000;
Conway and Husberg, 1999). It is not believed that these differences are due to
physiological differences in susceptibility to cold injury. Instead, it is most likely due to
differences in activities performed based on both age-related ability and gender-related
roles. It is probable that these activity-related differences were present in Native Alaskan
populations as well.

Zoltick 7
The age and sex estimates of the individuals were based on analysis of the os
coxae, as these were the only available bones for these analyses due to the absence of the
crania of these individuals. The right and left os coxae were not both present for all of
the individuals. A chart summarizing the age and sex estimates can be found in Figure 2
of the appendix.
The morphology of the os coxae can be the most reliable for the estimation of the
sex of human skeletal remains (Buikstra et al., 1994). This is due to the differing
functions of the males and females pelvises, with its use for both locomotion and birthing
for females. The sex of each of the individuals was determined based on the morphology
of the ventral arc, the subpubic concavity, the ischiopubic ramus ridge, the greater sciatic
notch, and the preauricular sulcus with each feature scored based on whether it exhibited
more female-like or more male-like characteristics. The results indicate that individual
29-80-144 was male, while individuals 5429, 5863, and 17340 were all female.
The age-related changes of the os coxae were used to estimate the age at the time
of death for the individuals (Buikstra et al., 1994). The morphological changes of the
pubic symphyseal faces were examined and scored using the Todd standards with a score
of 1 through 10 and the Suchey-Brooks standards with a score of 1 through 6 based on
the amount of deterioration. In addition, the auricular surfaces were examined and scored
on a scale of 1 through 8 for age-related changes. A general age class was determined, as
a more precise age is difficult to determine after the dentition has fully emerged. The
classes are divided into young adult, being approximately 20 to 35 years of age, middle
adult, being approximately 35 to 50 years of age, and an old adult, being 50+ years of
age. Individuals 29-80-144 and 5429 were estimated to be old adults, individual 5863

Zoltick 8
was estimated to be a middle adult, and individual 17340 was estimated to be a young
adult based on the amount of age-related changes to the os coxae.
The bones of the hands and feet for the four individuals were identified, sided,
and an inventory of those present in the collection was taken. Figures 3 and 4 in the
appendix indicate which bones of the hand and feet were present in the Native Alaskan
collection. The collection was not complete for any of the hands and feet of the four
individuals. The metacarpals and metatarsals were the most represented in the collection,
followed by the proximal phalanges and the intermediate phalanges respectively. The
vast majority of the distal phalanges were absent. This could be due to a number of
reasons, one of which is that the more distally located bones are smaller in size and may
have been harder to locate and retrieve when the collection was accumulated.
Based on the radiographic bone changes associated with known cases of frostbite
in present populations, the skeletal hand and foot remains of the Native Alaskan
collection were examined for any evidence of frostbite. The majority of the bones
appeared normal without signs of trauma, arthritis, or any pathologic changes. However,
there were two bones with abnormalities worth noting.
The first distal phalanx of the left foot of individual 5429 (the female, old adult)
showed abnormalities that could possibly be due to frostbite, though this is not
conclusive. This can be seen in Figure 5 of the appendix. Partial destruction of the
phalanx can be seen. In addition, there appears to be damage to the articular surface and
evidence of a punch-out lesion. The first proximal phalanx shows no signs of these bone
changes. In addition, three of the terminal phalanges of the left foot are not present in the

Zoltick 9
collection and there are no other signs of bone changes. Therefore, frostbite as the cause
for this damage cannot be ruled out.
An abnormality has also been noted for the third metatarsal of the left foot of
individual 17340 (the female, young adult) and can be seen in Figure 6 of the appendix.
The metatarsal exhibits a shortened diaphysis and a broad, flattened epiphysis. Frostbite
has been ruled out as the cause due to the presence of a callus. This is most likely an
indication of a fracture of the third metatarsal which was in the process of healing at the
time of death.
The collection did not reveal any strong indications of frostbite. Individual 5429
demonstrated possible evidence of a frostbite injury. However, widespread frostbite
injuries were not found, although they were expected due to the conditions of Point
Barrow, Alaska. There are a number of possible explanations for the rarity of frostbite
injuries in this collection.
First of all, the lack of frostbite injury could be due to the san1ple. The sample
size was small, with only four individuals represented. It is possible that frostbite was a
problem for Native Alaskans, but these four individuals were unaffected. Furthermore,
as mentioned for current populations, males tend to suffer from frostbite at higher rates
than females (Murphy et al., 2000; Conway and Husberg, 1999). The bones of the hand
and foot were present for only one male in this collection. Had there been additional
males, there may have been an increase in frostbite findings.
A major factor is probably the incompleteness of the collection. A majority of the
distal phalanges were not present and many of the intermediate phalanges were missing
as well. The frostbite induced bone damage that has been detected in a number of

Zoltick 10
radiographic studies indicate that the areas affected are most commonly the distal and
intermediate phalanges and only rarely are the metacarpals and metatarsals affected
(Rabold, 2004; Murphy et al., 2000; Tishler, 1972). Most of the metacarpals and
metatarsals were present and these showed no indication of frostbite injury, which was
not unexpected. The first distal phalanx of the left foot of individual 5429 showed
evidence of a possible frostbite injury. Had the collection included more of the distal
phalanges, it is possible that additional frostbite injuries may have been encountered
indicating an increased prevalence of the problem. Additionally, the absence of the distal
phalanges could be the result of their complete destruction due to frostbite. However, it
is impossible to make this claim for skeletal remains. The paleopathologic examples
were mummified remains, in which case the absence of distal phalanges due to
insufficient retrieval of remains is not an issue, as the bones remain enclosed within the
mummified individual if they were present at the time of death.
Furthermore, cold exposure could have caused frostbite in other areas, such as the
nose, which was not taken into consideration in the examination of this collection.
Vilhjalmur Stefansson (1913), who explored Point Barrow, Alaska in the early 1900s,
noted that frostbite to the cheeks and nose were quite common. Frostbite was dealt with
quite simply. He explained that" ... there is perhaps on one cheek a hard spot the size of a
quarter of a dollar, you press the palm on it a minute or so till it is as soft as the rest of
your cheek .... Then, a few days later, a bit of skin comes off. ... " This description
indicates that frostbite to the face was common. However, it also appears as though these
were only superficial frostbite injuries.

Zoltick 11
In addition, there is the possibility that frostbite affected the hands and feet of
these four individuals, but the damage was not severe enough to leave any osteological
evidence of its presence. As stated earlier, superficial frostbite involves only the skin and
will often heal (Bednar, 2003). Any of these four individuals could have been affected
by superficial frostbite. During life this would have left them with sensory loss, cold
sensitivity, or changes in the color of the skin in the affected areas (Murphy et al., 2000;
Rabold, 2004). However, in death, no evidence would have been left behind. The use of
radiographic studies may reveal bone changes that cannot be seen by the naked eye.
Lastly, the Native Alaskans may have had methods to combat the cold and the
damaging effects that it can cause. This could include both cultural and biological
adaptations to the climate (Moran, 1981 ). In this way, this population may have been
able to guard itself by innovation for suitable clothing and by physiological changes, both
allowing for at least some prevention of frostbite injury or at least a reduction in frostbite
injury in comparison to other populations.
Clothing is of extreme importance for battling the cold and preventing coldrelated injuries. The cultural practices involved with adequate clothing in the cold,
Alaskan climate include knowledge of the proper materials to use, preparation, stitching,
and design techniques, and care of the clothing (Stefansson, 1913; Moran, 1981; Kaplan,
1986). Coats, for example, are often made from young deer in the summer months, as
this is when the hair is short (Stefansson, 1913). In addition, the hood of a coat from the
Native Alaskan collection at the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and
Anthropology displays a wolverine hair trim, which will not freeze when subjected to the

Zoltick 12
breath of the individual wearing it (Kaplan, 1986). Grass is utilized as well, as grass
socks are often worn inside boots to absorb either water that leaks in or perspiration.
Garments are often designed with ventilation in mind by taking advantage of
drawstring openings which allow for the flow of air (Moran, 1981 ). This is an important
aspect because hard labor can result in perspiration and sweat-soaked clothing which will
not protect against the cold. The construction of the clothing involves care in the
preparation and stitching of the materials. The stitching must be done in a way in which
needle holes do not allow water to enter. When clothing does become wet it must be
dried to prevent rotting (Stefansson, 1913). These techniques are all crucial and
important barriers between the individual and the climate. In fact, there has been a great
deal of continuity in the construction of Native Alaskan clothing, as archaeological
findings from the sixteenth century indicate, due to the superiority of the clothing
(lssenman, 1997).
Biological protection from the cold has been suggested as well. Although
biological adaptations to the cold are controversial, there are examples of morphological
adaptation to cold climates that have been noted (Murphy et al., 2000; Hall et al., 2004;
So, 1980). In addition, a number of studies have been conducted with recent populations
of Native Alaskans which indicate possible physiological adaptations to the cold, with a
reduction in the risk of frostbite (Brown and Page, 1952; Coffey, 1955).
Morphological adaptations to cold climates include body proportions and nasal
morphology. A minimization of surface area exposure can conserve energy in cold
regions (Hall et al., 2004). Studies have shown that relatively high trunk to limb
proportions have been found in populations that reside in cold climates. Additionally,

Zoltick 13
Native Alaskan cranial morphology has been investigated for cold-related adaptations.
Small frontal sinus surface areas of an Alaskan skeletal population have been con-elated
with colder climates (Koertvelyessy, 1972; So, 1980). Koertvelyessy (1972) concluded
that the small frontal sinuses were an adaptation for thermoregulation. Shea (1977)
studied Alaskan craniofacial morphology as well, and found a decrease in maxillary sinus
size with decreasing temperatures.
Studies of cunent Alaskan native populations indicate additional adaptation to the
cold, and adaptations against frostbite in particular. A study by Brown and Page (1952)
compared the hand blood flow and temperature of males from a Native Alaskan
population from the Arctic and a Caucasian population living in a temperate climate. The
findings indicated that the hand blood flow of the Native Alaskan population was greater
at all of the temperatures tested. The temperature of the Native Alaskan's hands was
greater at lower temperatures as well. Furthermore, Coffey (1955) performed a
comparative study which suggests Native Alaskan adaptation specifically, rather than
acclimatization to the cold. In this study, young Native Alaskan males who were living
in a cold climate, but under more European-like conditions, including diet and customs,
were compared to white males in the military who had been living in the cold climate.
The Native Alaskan males maintained manual dexterity in the lower temperatures and
demonstrated an overall increased ability to tolerate the cold. In addition, the white
males suffered from more cases of frostbite and other cold injuries.
Evidence from the recent past is indicative of frostbite injuries. As mentioned
earlier, Stefansson ( 1913) described the frequent patches of superficial frostbite to the
face that were often experienced by the Native Alaskans. In addition, Mills and

Zoltick 14
Kettelkamp (1961) conducted an interview with a Native Alaskan, Maggie Lind, who
knew a great deal about traditional medical practices. The interview included a
description of the treatment of frostbite in which an injured area was " ... put in cold
water ... and [you] change the water until there is no more ice on the skin". Although the
number of individuals affected by frostbite was unknown, knowledge of a treatment for
frostbite injury would not be necessary if the injuries did not occur.
Frostbite continues to be a problem for Alaskan populations, for both Native and
more recently established inhabitants (Conway and Husberg, 1999). Two hw1dred and
thirteen hospitalizations were the result of frostbite in Alaska between the years 1991 and
1995. For those injured while working, 50% were in the military. Surprisingly, Native
Alaskans account for 51 % of all cold-related injuries that were contracted during nonwork related activities, yet they only make up 16% of Alaska's residents. However, this
can be explained by changes in the economy, which have affected the availability of
materials for making clothes and the amount of time that is necessary for making
traditional Alaskan clothing (Issenman, 1997; Buijs and Oosten, 1997).
Frostbite-related information is not extremely extensive and most of the
information is on the pathophysiology and treatment (Conway and Husberg, 1999). The
majority of frostbite studies have focused on individuals in the military, especially during
World War 11 and the Korean War, when a number of cold-related injuries were sustained
(Murphy et al., 2000). Interest in frostbite injuries in the general population has
increased in the past few decades. However, additional research could be of great
importance, especially among Alaskan populations where this is an issue. In addition, a
better understanding of the traditional ways in which they combated the cold culturally,

Zoltick 15
with clothing, could be extremely beneficial, especially when compared to the clothing
worn by military servicemen who experience a high prevalence of frostbite (Edwards and
Leeper, 1952). In fact, during Alaskan expeditions in the early twentieth century,
European style clothing was often rejected and replaced by the traditional Alaskan
clothing (Stefansson, 1913). However, acceptance of the benefits of the Native Alaskan
garb was not initially accepted by Westerners (Buijs and Oosten, 1997).
Despite the cultural and biological mechanisms that could aid in the prevention of
frostbite injuries and the scanty evidence of frostbite injuries in the Native Alaskan
skeletal collection from Point Barrow, it is doubtful that this population did not endure
cold-related injuries to some extent. This is because the climatic conditions were harsh
and frostbite is highly prevalent in the area today. For this reason, additional research of
larger collections of skeletal remains of Native Alaskan populations could provide a great
deal of infom1ation on the affects of the climate on populations in the past.

Zoltick 16

Appendix

..,

......

Figure l. The arrow indicates the location of Barrow, Alaska.
The map is from the national atlas (United States Department of the Interior, 2006).

Identification
Number

Os Coxae

Sex

Age

29-80-144

Right & Left

Male

Old Adult

5429

Right

Female

Old Adult

5863

Left

Female

Middle Adult

17340

Right & Left

Female

Young Adult

Figure 2. Summary of os coxae inventory and subsequent sex and age results.

Zoltick 17

Bone
Right Hand

•··2~144

>

.....
-;'.·;-°'··

Identification Number

•,'54i~:i:C \'.- :. >/~~3,-)

I

17340 ..

·:···.·
..
.....

R-Scaphoid

✓

✓

R-Lunate

✓

✓

R-Triquetral
R-Pisiform

✓

✓
✓

✓

✓

✓

R-Capitate
R-Hamate

✓

✓

✓

✓

R-1 st Metacarpal
R-2nd Metacarpal

✓
✓

✓

R-3rd Metacarpal

✓

✓

R-4th Metacarpal
R-5th Metacarpal

✓

✓

✓

✓

R-1st Proximal Phalanx

✓

✓

R-2nd Proximal Phalanx

✓

✓

R-3rd Proximal Phalanx
R-4th Proximal Phalanx

✓

✓

✓

✓

R-5th Proximal Phalanx

✓

✓

R-2nd Intermediate Phalanx

✓

R-3rd Intermediate Phalanx
R-4th Intermediate Phalanx
R-5th Intermediate Phalanx

✓

R-1st Distal Phalanx

✓

R-2nd Distal Phalanx

✓
✓

R-Trapezium
R-Trapezoid

✓
✓

R-3rd Distal Phalanx
R-4th Distal Phalanx
R-5th Distal Phalanx
Left Hand

✓

._

·-

29°80~14.4\/- >:>· \5~~ ":,=::.:_:::._;-!: •• ·•Li:586:!t/\ -•_;
·-

L-Scaphoid

✓

:17340\:·
✓

L-Lunate
L-Triquetral
L-Pisiform
✓

L-Trapezium
L-Trapezoid
L-Capitate
L-Hamate
L-1st Metacarpal
L-2nd Metacarpal

✓

L-4th Metacarpal
L-Sth Metacarpal

✓

✓

L-3rd Metacarpal
✓

✓
✓

L-1st Proximal Phalanx

✓

L-2nd Proximal Phalanx

✓

L-3rd Proximal Phalanx

✓

L-4th Proximal Phalanx
L-Sth Proximal Phalanx

✓
✓

L-2nd Intermediate Phalanx

✓

L-3rd Intermediate Phalanx

✓

L-4th Intermediate Phalanx
L-Sth Intermediate Phalanx

✓

L-1st Distal Phalanx
L-2nd Distal Phalanx
L-3rd Distal Phalanx
L-4th Distal Phalanx
L-Sth Distal Phalanx

✓

Figure 3.
An
inventory
ofthe
bones of
the right
and left
hand for
the Native
Ala..-,kan
collection.

Zoltick 18

Right Foot
R-Talus

✓

R-Calcaneus
R-Cuboid
R-Navicular

✓
✓

R-Medial Cuneiform
R-lntermediate Cuneiform
R-Lateral Cuneiform
R-1 st Metatarsal
R-2nd Metatarsal

✓
✓
✓

R-3rd Metatarsal
R-4th Metatarsal

✓

R-5th Metatarsal
R-1st Proximal Phalanx

✓

✓

R-2nd Proximal Phalanx
R-3rd Proximal Phalanx
R-4th Proximal Phalanx
R-Sth Proximal Phalanx
R-2nd Intermediate Phalanx
R-3rd Intermediate Phalanx
R-4th Intermediate Phalanx
R-Sth Intermediate Phalanx
R-1st Distal Phalanx
R-2nd Distal Phalanx
R-3rd Distal Phalanx
R-4th Distal Phalanx
R-Sth Distal Phalanx
Left Foot·

....

L-Talus
L-Calcaneus

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

L-Cuboid

✓

✓

✓

1'

✓

L-Navicular

✓

✓

✓

L-Medial Cuneiform

✓

✓

✓

L-lntermediate Cuneiform
L-Lateral Cuneiform

✓

✓

✓

✓

L-1sI Metatarsal

✓

✓

L-2nd Metatarsal
L-3rd Metatarsal

✓
✓

✓
✓
✓

L-4th Metatarsal
L-Sth Metatarsal

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

L-5th Proximal Phalanx
L-2nd Intermediate Phalanx

✓

L-3rd Intermediate Phalanx

✓

L-4th Intermediate Phalanx

L-3rd Distal Phalanx
L-4th Distal Phalanx
L-5th Distal Phalanx

✓

✓

✓

L-4th Proximal Phalanx

L-5th Intermediate Phalanx
L-1st Distal Phalanx
L-2nd Distal Phalanx

✓

✓

L-1st Proximal Phalanx
L-2nd Proximal Phalanx
L-3rd Proximal Phalanx

✓

✓
✓

✓

Figure 4.
An
inventory
of the
bones of
the right
and left
foot for the
Native
Alaskan
collection.

Zoltick 19

Figure 5. The first distal phalanx
of the left foot of individual 5429.

Figure 6. The third metatarsal of
the left foot of individual 17340.
The arrow indicates the location
of a callus.

Zoltick 20
References

Bednar, M.S. and Light, T.R. (2003). Cold injury. In H.B. Skinner (Ed.), Current
Diagnosis and Treatment in Orthopedics, 3rd edition. Retrieved on April 19, 2006

from the University of Pennsylvania, McGraw-Hill's Access Medicine, <http://
proxy. Ii brary. upenn. edu: 823 0/content.aspx?aID= 17013 3&searchStr=frostbite>.
Brown, G.M. and Page, J. (1952). The effect of chronic exposure to cold temperature
and blood flow of the hand . .Journal ofApplied Physiology. 5(5): 221-227.
Buijs, C. and Oosten, J. (1997). Continuity and change in arctic clothing. In C. Buijs
and H. Oosten (Eds.), Braving the Cold. Ridderkerk: Ridderprint.
Buikstra, J.E., Ubelaker, D.H., and Aftandilian, D. (Eds.). (1994). Standards for Data
Collection from Human Skeletal Remains. Fayetteville: Arkansas Archeological

Survey.
Carrera, G.F., Kozin, F., and McCarty, DJ. (1979). Arthritis after frostbite injury in
children. Arthritis and Rheumatism. 22(10): I 082-1087.
Coffey, M.F. (1955). A comparative study of young Eskimo and Indian males with
acclimatized white males. In M.L Ferrer (Ed.), Cold Injury: transactions of the
third co'?ference (pp. I 00-116). New York: Josiah Macy, Jr. Foundation.

Conway, G.A. and Husberg, B.J. (1999). Cold-related non-fatal injuries in Alaska.
American .Journal ofIndustrial Medicine Supplement. I: 39-41.

Danz!, D.F. (2005). Hypothermia and Frostbite. In D.L. Kasper, E. Braunwald, A.S.
Fauci, S.L. Hauser, D.L. Longo, J.L. Jameson, and K.J. Isselbacher (Eds.),
Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine, 16th edition. Retrieved on April 19,

Zoltick 21
2006 from the University of Pennsylvania, McGraw-Hill's Access Medicine,
<http ://proxy. Ii brary. upenn. edu: 823 0/content.aspx?aID= 52 807>.
Dreyfuss, J.R. and Glimcher, M.J. (1955). Epiphyseal injury following frostbite. The
New England .Journal of Medicine. 253 (24): 1065-1068.

Edwards, E.A. and Leeper, R.W. (1952). Frostbite: an analysis of seventy-one cases.
The .Journal of the American Medical Association. 149( 13): 1199-1205.

Ellis, R., Short, .T.G., and Simonds, B.D. (1969). Unilateral osteoarthritis of the distal
interphalangealjoints following frostbite. Radiology. 93: 857-858.
Hall, R., Roy, D., and Boling, D. (2004). Pleistocene migration into the Americas:
human biological adaptations and environmental constraints. Evolutionary
Anthropology. 13: 132-144.

Hawkes, E.W. (1916). Skeletal measurements and observations of the Point Barrow
Eskimo with comparisons with other Eskimo groups. American Anthropologist.
18(2): 203-245.
lssenman, B.K. (1997). Stiches in time: prehistoric Inuit skin clothing and related tools.
In C. Buijs and H.Oosten (Eds.), Braving the Cold. Ridderkerk: Ridderprint.
Kaplan, S.A. (Curator). (1986). Raven's journey: the world of Alaska's native people
(exhibit). University of Penm,ylvania Museum ofArchaeology and Anthropology,
Philadelphia, PA.
Koertvelyessy, T. (1972). Relationships between frontal sinus and climatic conditions:
a skeletal approach to cold adaptation. American .Journal ofPhysical
Anthropology. 37: 161-172.

Littell, E.T. (1952). Frostbite. Scientific American. 186: 52-56.

Zoltick 22
Mills, W.J. and Kettelkamp, D.B. (1961 ). Kuskokwim medicine. Alaska Medicine. 3:
73-76.
Moran, E.F. (1981). Human adaptation to arctic zones. Annual Review of Anthropology.
10: 1-25.
Murphy, .T.V., Banwell, P.E., Roberts, A.H.N., and McGrouther, D.A. (2000). Frostbite:
pathogenesis and treatment. The Journal of Trauma: Injury, Infection, and

Critical Care. 48(1): 171-178.
Murphy, W.A., zur Nedden, D., Knapp, R., Recheis, W., and Seidler, H. (2003). The
Iceman: discovery and imaging. Radiology. 226(3): 614-629.
Olsson, P.Q., Stum, M., Racine, C.H., Romanovsky, V., and Liston, G.E. (2003). Five
stages of the Alaskan arctic cold season with ecosystem implications. Arctic,

Antarctic, and Alpine Research. 35(1): 74-81.
Point Barrow. (2006). Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved April 19, 2006 from the
University of Pennsylvania, from Encyclopedia Britannica Online, <http://
proxy.library.upenn.edu:9022/eb/article-9060538>.
Post, P.W. and Donner, D.D. (1972). Frostbite in a pre-Columbian mummy. American

.Journal of Physical Anthropology. 37: 187-192.
Rabold, M.B. (2004). Frostbite and other localized cold-related injuries. In J.E.
Tintinalli, G.D. Kelen, J.S. Stapczynski, O.J. Ma, and D.M. Cline (Eds.)

Tintinal/i 's Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide, 6th edition.
Retrieved April 19, 2006 from the University of Pennsylvania, McGraw-Hill's
Access Medicine, <http://proxy.library.upenn.edu:8230/content.aspx
?a!D=604308>.

Zoltick 23
Selke, A.C. (1969). Destruction ofphalangeal epiphyses by frostbite. Radiology. 93:
859-860.
Shea, B.T. (1977). Eskimo craniofacial morphology, cold stress and the maxillary sinus.

American Journal of Physical Antrhopology. 47: 289-300.
So, .T.K. (1980). Human biological adaptation to arctic and subarctic zones. Annual

Review ofAnthropology. 9: 63-82.
Solomon, S.D. (1980). Frostbite arthritis. Arthritis and Rheumatism. 23(11 ): 1332.
State of Alaska. (2006). Barrow. Community Database Online. Retrieved April 18,
2006, <http://www.commerce.state.ak.us/dca/commdb/CF_ BLOCK.cfm>.
Stefansson, V. (1913). Misconceptions about life in the arctic. Bulletin of the American

Geographical Society. 45(1): 17-32.
Thelander, H.E. ( 1950). Epiphyseal destruction by frostbite. The Journal of Pediatrics.
36: 105-106.
Tishler, J.M. (1972). The soft-tissue and bone changes in frostbite injuries. Radiology.
102: 511-513.
United States Department of the Interior. (2006). Alaska reference map. National Atlas.
Retrieved on April 19, 2006, <http://nationalatlas.gov/printable/reference.html
#list>.
University of Pennsylvania Museum. (2002). Raven's journey: the world of Alaska's
native people. University of Pennsylvania Museum o/Archaeology and

Anthropology. Retrieved on April 18, 2006 <http://www.museum.upenn.edu/
new/exhibits/galleries/nativealaska.html>.

Zoltick 24
University of Pennsylvania Museum. (2004). The ethnographic, archaeological, and
skeletal remains from the Point Barrow community. University of Pennsylvania
Museum ofArchaeology and Anthropology REUINSF Site. Retrieved on April
18, 2006, <http://www.museum.upenn.edu/new/N SF-REUsite/museum
/project! .shtml>.

