Anthropology Senior Theses

University of Pennsylvania

ScholarlyCommons
Department of Anthropology

Summer 2006

Him-Dak: Contextualizing the Diabetes Experience of American
Indians
Hannah Park
University of Pennsylvania

Follow this and additional works at: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses

Q

Part of the Anthropology Commons

Recommended Citation
Park, Hannah, "Him-Dak: Contextualizing the Diabetes Experience of American Indians" (2006).
Anthropology Senior Theses. Paper 72.

This paper is posted at ScholarlyCommons. https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/72
For more information, please contact repository@pobox.upenn.edu.

Him-Dak: Contextualizing the Diabetes Experience of American Indians
Disciplines
Anthropology

This thesis or dissertation is available at ScholarlyCommons: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/72

Him-Dak 1

Him-Dak:
Contextualizing the Diabetes Experience of American Indians

by
Hannah Park

Senior Honors Thesis
University of Pennsylvania
Submitted to the Department of Anthropology
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Bachelor of Arts
May 2006

Him-Dak 2

"Medicine is a social science, and politics is nothing more than medicine on a large scale."
- Rudolf Virchow in
Die Medizinishce Reform (Medical Reform)

Him-Dak 3
Acknowledgements

Thanks to Dr. Frances Barg for her devoted commitment, sincere understanding, and
seasoned wisdom in approaching this project and life. You have truly challenged and
encouraged me to stretch my understandings in the factors that affect health/ well-being and the
experience/ distribution of illness.

Thanks to Dr. Marilyn Norcini for her valuable guidance in approaching American Indian
communities with respect of their sovereignty.

Thanks to Dr. Tonya Taylor who pointed me to a theoretical orientation that
revolutionized my paradigm in approaching health disparities.

Thanks to the Native Voices: Past and Present Research Experience for Undergraduates
Program for their financial support and encouragements (both verbal and not) to finish!

Thanks to my participants for their support when I needed it the most. ©

Thanks to the Ak-Chin Indian Community that permitted an opportunity to present a
research proposal and gain experience in field work methodology.

Thanks to Josie for unfolding the story of her community with a few words.

Him-Dak 4
Introduction

Josie met me under the Feast House while I was jotting some field notes on the day's
activities and observations. We were exchanging casual stories and jokes, and she asked me for
the reason why I was on the reservation. As I shared with her the basic intent and structure of
my research proposal with her community, she shared,

"People come around here all the time. You know, people who don't live here. People who
want to study us. We 're used to seeing this. But things really haven't changed after all those
people coming in and asking questions, taking blood ... after all those times. I got this
diabetes thing eventually. I mean, I was sorta expecting it. We hear about it all the time. All
my family has it. And now I live with it. This is Him-Dak for me, for us. "
Her words left me unable to respond. And in my silence, she continued to share her
feelings and experiences unprompted until her ride came by to take her to the dialysis clinic for
her regular treatment. We parted ways with smiles on our faces. I stayed at the Feast House and
continued to think through her statement, "This is Him-Dak for me, for us" meaning "This is
myI our way of life for me, for us." I continued to think through this statement in the hotel

room, back in the dormitory on campus, everywhere all the time. This investigative query and
paper ultimately resulted from Josie's words.
Although most research projects related to type II diabetes focus on diet, physical
activity, and genetics, I contend that these issues obscure the socioeconomic issues fundamental
to the etiology of diabetes. When the physical manifestations of diabetes - high blood sugar,
depression, blurry vision - are torn from their social contexts, the patients are stripped of the
social and moral meanings their bodies are trying to communicate. In this paper, the political
economy of diabetes will be explored through the social-economic history of the Pima Indians of
the Ak-Chin Indian Community to show how type II diabetes relates to macro-level politics and
economics as they affect and shape the mediating micro-level experiences of the individual.

Him-Dak 5
Through contextualization of the diabetes experience, I will outline a history of traumatic losses
and shrinking culture from the exploitive imperialistic endeavors of colonization that have made
this particular population group susceptible to diabetes. The themes of loss in terms of natural
resources, autonomy, and identity/culture are common in most American Indian histories as well
as other colonized indigenous populations all around the world.

The diabetes epidemic
In 2002, 27.8% of American Indians in the southeastern United States had been told by a
doctor or other health professional that they had diabetes mellitus (Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, 2005a) while 7% of the total adult population in the United States had been told
the same (Center for Disease Control and Prevention 2005b ). On average, American Indians and
Alaskan Natives are 2.3 times more likely to have diabetes as non-Hispanic Anglos of similar
age (Center for Disease Control and Prevention 2005a). Although these statistics are alarmingly
high for American Indians as a whole, more than half of the Pima Indian adults of Arizona over
the age of 35 have been diagnosed with Type II diabetes (Knowler, Pettit, Bennett, and Williams
1983: I 07).
Because of the disproportional incidence and prevalence rates of diabetes of the Pima
Indian community, this population group is more !mown for their diabetes than for their history
or culture and has been the focus of countless research and intervention studies. Despite this
concentrated effort, data from research conducted by the National Institutes of Health since 1965
reveal that the incidence of Pima diabetes to have increased for three successive decades in both
men and women (Narayan 1997: 173). Diabetes is also a pertinent issue for national and
international investigations with escalating rates of incidence and prevalence around the world.

Him-Dak6
Recently compiled data show that approximately 150 million people have diabetes mellitus
worldwide, and that this number may well double by the year 2025 (World Health Organization
2002).
There are three primary forms of diabetes mellitus, but the most frequent form of diabetes
being detected in indigenous populations around the world is type II. Morbidity and mortality
rates associated with both type I and type II diabetes manifest as secondary illnesses and
complications including: (1) cataracts, glaucoma, and the diabetic retinopathy leading to
impaired vision and blindness; (2) diabetic neuropathy, which leads to end-stage renal disease;
(3) increased frequency of cardiovascular associated diseases including coronary artery disease,
stroke, hypertension, and lower limb vascular disease that may result in gangrene and lower limb
amputation; (4) increased susceptibility to infection; (5) increased rates of periodontal disease;
(6) increased rates of perinatal mortality and congenital abnormalities; and (7) neropathy (Joe
and Young 1994:3). Because of these secondary complications, diabetes is a costly disease not
only in terms of medical costs but also in terms of human cost. Morbidity rates are particularly
high for American Indians. Among the Pima Indians, type II diabetes is a leading cause of
extremity amputation and acquired renal disease, is associated with an increased risk for
ischemic heart disease and infections, contributes to higher risk for depression, which is made
worse by alcoholism (Narayan 1997:178; Harris l 998:s20). Diabetes-related conditions account
for 19.5% of all age-adjusted Pima deaths, four times that of Anglos and two times that of blacks
in the United States (Newman, DeStefano, Val way, German, and Muneta 1993 :298).

Him-Dak 7
Biomedicine

Like most health disparities patterns, diabetes is not strictly a bio-medical problem and
has economic, social, cultural, and political dimensions. However, genetics, nutrition, obesity,
and physical activity are the default explanations for the diabetes epidemic in lieu of more
psychosocial and economic factors.
All medical systems, including biomedicine, are cultural systems rooted in particular
social traditions and socially constructed world views. Biomedicine is one among numerous
alternative professional ethnomedicines. All medicines share a basic epistemological quality:
they are versions of reality, stocks of knowledge and modes of comprehension and action in
reference to, but ontological distinct form, reality (Gaines and Hahn 1985:6). Biomedicine sees
social factors as clues to the "real" biological/pathogenic causes of disease. However, this
approach focuses on the proximate causes of disease and illness but ignores the ultimate.
Disease is more than just the straightforward outcome of an infectious agent or
pathophysiological disturbance. Instead, a variety of problems - including malnutrition,
economic insecurity, occupational risks, bad housing, and lack of political power - create an
underlying predisposition to disease and death (Waitzkin 1981:98). Under a biomedical
investigation, a sick individual is regarded as a set of physical symptoms, rather than as a person
who belongs to a social class in a particular society. This process turns our attention away from
the political roots of disease, and conceals these roots by providing us with an alternative
explanation. By and large, this explanation implies that people are responsible for their own
health leading to a blame-the-victim mentality (de Beer 1986:70). In essence, you are
responsible for your health, and when you get sick, you have not acted in a responsible fashion.

Him-Dak 8

The role of stress in diabetes
According to biomedical principles, type II diabetes is characterized by insulin resistance
due to a post receptor defect in cells inhibiting the insulin-cell receptor interaction that facilitates
cellular uptake of glucose. However, there is a neurophysiological link between stress and
glucose intolerance that has been consistently overlooked. The systematic exposure to trauma,
stressors and other kinds of nervous stimuli can produce diabetes (Poss 2000; Rock 2003). For
example, Jo Scheder's analysis of the social issues fundamental to the etiology of the disease has
demonstrated the relationship between stressful evens and life change, social inequality and
psychological stress inherent in a migrant life-style, and physiological responses culminating in
hyperglycemia (1988; Morsy 1990:38). This occurs through corticosterone and adrenaline which
metabolizes fat, carbohydrates, and proteins and also stimulates the sympathetic nervous system
to increase the production of glucose in the liver and release it into the organism. The
implications of this oversight in psychosocial and economic factors are that the contexts that
engender heightened blood sugars are left undisturbed while drug therapies bring blood glucose
levels down (Ferriera 1996). Therefore, there is a great need to devote the same attention to the
broad contexts of human environments and experiences as to micro-level analyses of human
behavior and its biological correlates in fully investigating the diabetes epidemic of the Pima
Indians.

The Pima Indians of the Ak-Chin Indian Community
The Pima Indians of Southern Arizona have lived near the Phoenix area for at least 500
years and may be descendents of the ancient Hohokam who occupied southern and central
Arizona for about 1100 years between about AD 400 and AD 1500 (Smith-Morris 2001 :13).

Him-Dak 9
The Ak-Chin Indian Community was created in May of 1912 by the Executive Order of
President Taft who initially signed for a 47,600 acre reservation. However, the following year he
rescinded that order and reduced the Community to its current size of just under 22,000 acres
(Inter Tribal Council of Arizona, Inc. 2003) (Figure 1) (Figure 2). Ak-Chin is an O'odham word
that means, "a place where the water loses itself in the sand or ground."

FIG 1. A) Borders of Ak-Chin lndi an Community in Arizona. Star indicates location of Ak-Chin Diabetes
Preventi on Program and Ak-Chin Health Clinic.

FIG 2 Main residential area of Ak-Chin Indian Community in Arizona with borders. A)
Harrah's Ak-Chin Casino. B) Dialysis center. C) Ak-Chin Him-Oak Eco-Museum. D)
Urban center of the city of Maricopa_

The Ak-Chin Indian Community is a federally recognized tribe with an annual budget of
more than a million dollars and with approximately 700 members ofTohono O' odham and Pima
peoples. The median age of the community population is just under 23 years, and the major
employers are Ak-Chin Farms, Vekol Commissary, AK.CO lumber and supply, Walker Farm
Fresh Meats, Ak-Chin tribal government, and Harrah's Casino (U.S. Census Bureau 2000; Inter
Tribal Council of Arizona, Inc. 2003). Reservation land is primarily used for agriculture, and
these 15,000 acres of farm land primarily produce barley, potatoes, alfalfa, cotton, pecans, com,
and milo (Ak-Chin Fann Board 2004:8). The tribal economy is supported by one casino,
Harrah's Ak-Chin Casino (Figure 3).

Him-Dak 11

Fl G 3. Harrah's Ak-Chin Casino In the heart of the reservation.

The community is governed by an elected five person community tribal council. A small
health clinic is located on the reservation that meets the general needs of the community but
requires a car to get there since it is about a three to five mile distance from the residential cluster
(Figure 4). This clinic is funded by the Gila River Health Care Corporation. The Ak-Chin
Diabetes Prevention Program is located right next to this clinic and offers services for
community outreach, preschool activities, worksite fairs, and individual education and
counseling (Figure 4). This clinic is funded by the Department of Health and Human services
through the Special Diabetes Program for Indians Grant. A dialysis center is located at the edge
of a cluster of residential homes on the reservation and is privately run and operated (Figure 5).
The nearest hospital serving emergency biomedical needs is the Hu Hu Kam Memorial Hospital

Him-Dale 12

which is about an hour's drive away driving at the speed limit of the roads. Another hospital is
the Phoenix Indian Center which is about a drive for an hour and a half.

-·
,,.

FIG 4. A) Tribal council. B) AA-Chin Diabetes Prevention Program clinic . C) Ak-Chin
health clinic.

Him-Dak 13

..

•
:r

---

_-- - -

-

-

-

-=-

--

"

~~

- =----.

- - - - - , , .. _

-

-_

-

-

-

-

_-

FIG 5. A) Dialysis center at edge of residential area of reservation.

A small commissary, V ekol' s, serves some of the material needs for the community like
sparse groceries, few school supplies, and minimal hardware supplies (Figure 6). The
commissary also boasts a kitchen that serves hot food and a gas station. For larger needs,
members of the Ak-Chin community can take a five minute drive into the rapidly growing city of
Maricopa just outside the borders of the reservation to the grocery store which was established
two years ago. Prior to the establishment of the grocery store, individuals and families traveled
nearly an hour to purchase affordable produce and other necessary materials.

Him-Dak 14

VEKOL
COMMISSARY
Phone: 520-568-2225

FIG 6. Advertisement for commissary products and services on
reservation. Appears in all issues of the Ak-Chin O'odham Runner,
the local newspaper distributed to all households on the reservation.

There are about 750 residents that live in the Ak-Chin Indian Community. Of these 750
residents, 700 are enrolled Tribal members, and of these 700 Tribal members, about 500 actually
live on the reservation composing about 250 households. Of these 500 members, 205 have been
diagnosed with type II diabetes - nearly half the community's population. The breakdown of
prevalence shows that type II diabetes affects adults over the age of 30 years the most (Figure 7).
Of these diagnosed diabetics, nearly 40% experience serious morbidity associated with type II
diabetes i.e. end stage renal disease, limb amputation, dialysis/kidney transplantation.

Him-Oak 15

Ak-Chin Diabetic Composition by Age
60
.$.
l't!
::I
"C

50

:~

40

-

30

"C
C:

0

,_
Q)

.Q

E
::I

z

20
10
0
10 to 19

20to 29

30to 39

40to 49

50to 59

Age grouping (years)
FIG 7. Data taken from Ak-Chin Diabetes Program monthly newsletter (January 2004).

History: Loss of natural resources
The loss of natural resources is a common theme among the histories of American Indian
populations, and Carolyn Smith-Morris in her dissertation has outlined the experiences of the
Pima Indians of the Gila River Reservation (2001: 13-32), which are similar to the experiences of
the Pima Indians of the Ak-Chin Indian Community. As populations in the West grew during
the 18 th century and access to water became increasingly contested, water became a commodity
in the desert especially for farmers in the Southwest like the Pima Indians. The Pimas
maintained their agricultural fields and irrigation canals based on knowledge from a long history
of excellent agricultural subsistence. However, increasing Anglo immigration to the Southwest
th

through much of the 19 century placed pressure on American Indians for space and resources.
The Indian Removal Act of 1830 threw open the door for imperialist expansion south and west

Him-Dak 16
across what would become U.S. territory. When the Pimas had "secured land" through
reservation policy near the end of the 19th century, almost all of the Pima farms had dried up due
to loss of water to upstream Anglos who violated prior appropriation rights to river water flow.
The San Carlos Irrigation Project of 1924 aimed to alleviate these drought conditions, but once
construction had completed in the mid-l 930s, water allocation proved to be unequal and left the
Pimas on a partial water supply.
In addition to the lack of water, Indian small-scale farms were increasingly unable to
cope or compete with the growing technologization of farming around the Phoenix area through
the first quarter of the 20 th century. Small family plots were not well-organized or economically
capable of harvesting enough to subsist upon, and the Pima farmers sold or leased to Anglo
farmers. Because of Anglo encroachment into tribal territories and on tribal access to water, the
Pima could no longer support themselves through farming alone. This need for a larger, more
productive, and more lucrative farming lead to the transition into wage labor, income from leased
lands, and dependency on federal aid money.

History: Loss of autonomy

Tribal nations have continually been recognized as parties incapable of dealing with the
United States yet they remained separate if wholly unequal sovereigns outside the pale of the
American Constitution. The overall treatment of American Indian sovereignty and autonomy of
the United States has gone through a period of seven distinct stages (Canby 1988, Smith-Morris
2001). From 1790 to 1834, several Trade and Intercourse Acts separated Indians from nonIndians and placed all interactions between these two under federal control. During the Removal
Period from 1820 to 1850, tribes were forced to relocate to West of the Mississippi, and

Him-Dak 17
legislature at that time framed tribes to be "domestic dependent nations" with the U.S. federal
government acting like a guardian. During the Reservation Period from 1850 to 1887, Indians
were forced into reservation land to create not only physical distance between Indians and nonIndians but to also "civilize" them through the work of missionaries, supervision of an Indian
agent, and boarding schools. Also, the General Allotment Act of 1887 negated Indian rights to
possess and occupy their lands, destroyed tribal traditions and influence, and dismantled most
tribal governments by imposing concepts of property ownership and legal title and promoting
different patterns of land use and personal occupation ushering in an era of poverty that has been
and continues to be difficult to overcome.
There was a shift in policy attitude after the Meriam Report in 1928. During the Indian
Reorganization period from 1934 to 1952, the Secretary of the Interior authorized land and water
rights to set up reservations and permitted tribes to once again organize constitutions and bylaws.
From 1953 to 1967, Congress retreated to a policy of termination, canceling the status of many
Indians as wards of the U.S. However, from 1967 onwards to the present day, the federal
government has been pushing for self-determination of American Indians. The SelfDetermination Act of 1974 was the first time that tribes were given money to build selfgovernance, administration, and development capacities and were allowed to succeed and fail on
their own merit. Since then, tribes have rejected grant-like support from the federal government
in favor for contract-based support. PL9-638, commonly called 638 compacts, have been passed
to take programs and funds away from the Bureau of Indian Affairs to the tribes while
maintaining U.S. legal and moral support for these services.

Him-Dak 18

History: Loss of identity
During the Reservation period from 1850 to 1887, a variety of procedures were
implemented to "kill the Indian but save the man." The missionary movement sought to civilize
and Christianize the "savage Indian" through assimilation either in time or in the after-life, which
destroyed the Indian way of life and permitted the expansion of the Anglo population (McF enzie
1914). Boarding schools have represented the ultimate legacies in loss of culture and identity.
Off-reservation boarding schools were established to permit the education of Indian children
away from tribal environments to further the civilizing mission of reservation because the
government had decided that it would be more effective to "civilize" children who would then
affect their parents and elders and also future generations (Garrett and Pichette 2000).
"It is a great mistake to think that the Indian is born an inevitable savage. He is born a blank,

like the rest of us. Left in the surrounds of savagery, he grows to possess a savage language,
superstition, and life. We, left in the surroundings of civilization, grow to possess a civilized
language, life, and purpose. Transfer the infant white to savage surroundings, he will grow
to possess a savage language superstition, and habit. Transfer a savage born infant to the
surroundings of civilization, and he will grow to posses a civilized language and habit. .. The
end to be gained is the complete civilization of the Indian ... the sooner all tribal relations are
broken up, the sooner the Indian loses all his Indian ways, even his language, the better it will
be." (Pratt 1987).
Before 1928, boarding schools removed Indian children from family influence,
eliminated Native languages in favor of English, outlawed traditional religion and customary
practices, instilled Christian religion, and indoctrinated children to Anglo values in a culture of

Him-Dak 19
strict military discipline. However, things changed slightly when the results of a Senate
investigation of the government's dealings with the American Indians were published in the
Meriam Report of 1928. In this report, boarding schools were found to be deficient in education,
living conditions, health care, teach and matron qualifications, and curriculum. After 1928,
boarding schools were primarily used for vocational training and instilling self-sufficiency and
productivity to the Indian worker.

Historical Critique
Poverty, inequality, and exploitation have shaped the material conditions, experiences,
and perceptions of conditions for individuals and groups at the local level (Leatherman 2005:54).
The historical analysis of Pima Indian history have shown that the political economy of
agricultural development and nutrition were conducive to the maintenance of many basic causes
of malnutrition and disease as land rights shifted through agrarian reform and penetration of
capitalist relations into the rural economy (Leatherman 2005 :56). A strategy of agricultural
development based on large-scale farming lead to a majority of farmers being driven off their
own land; monopolistic control of the land, essential for the burgeoning agribusiness, caused
formerly independent farmers to lose control over crop acerage and food production (Taussig
1978). Furthermore, consequent rise in markets and commodization of goods and labor drew
rural producers into a cash economy and significantly altered local social and economic
differentiation and capabilities of dealing with health and production problems when they arose
(Leatherman 2005:57). This changing relations of production altered people's perceptions of
their own vulnerability as well as their ability to operate within conditions of economic
marginality. The loss of agro-pastoral livelihood has signified a loss of social and cultural

Him-Dak 20
identity and represents another setoff meanings and implications of vulnerability in addition to
the vulnerability from the forceful loss of culture and identity. These vulnerabilities also made
the Pima Indians more dependent on the paternalistic federal government for essential supplies
and needs to survive the daily life.

Narratives: Methodology
"The body is molded by a great many distinct regimes; it is broken down by the rhythms of
work, rest and holidays; it is poisoned by food or values through eating habits or moral laws;
it constructs resistances. The body manifests the stigmata of past experience and also gives
rise to desires, failing, and errors. These elements may join in a body where they achieve a
sudden expression, but as often, their encounter is an engagement in which they efface each
other, where the body becomes the pretext of their insurmountable conflict. The body is the
inscribed surface of events (traced by language and dissolved by ideas), and a volume in
perpetual disintegration" (Foucalt 1993:148).
In sum, the body does not completely escape the influence of history. Although the
relationship of domination and loss has indeed marked its power and engraved memories on
suffering bodies, individuals have always reinterpreted the world according to its ever-changing
conditions of existence, just as knowledges produced by other societies are always subject to
transformation and revolutions (Ferriera 1994: 74). The body is not a passive and objectified
biological artifact devoid of intentionality or intersubjectivity; rather it is dynamic, innovative,
expressive, and unrestrained, and the body and bodily experiences cannot be separated from their
cultural meanings (Taylor 2006: 5).

Him-Dak 21
Because of logistical reasons, I was unable to interview the Pima Indians of the Ak-Chin
Indian Community directly to investigate their personal experiences and thoughts on diabetes.
Instead, seven visiting and full-time American Indian undergradautes at the University of
Pennsylvania were asked to participate in a study examining their thoughts on diabetes. They
were also asked if they could identify one family member or friend that would be willing to
speak with me on their thoughts on diabetes. A total of fourteen tape-recorded interviews were
conducted with American Indians from New Mexico, Arizona, and Alaska. There were seven
males and seven females. Also, seven participants were 20-25 years old, and the other seven
participants ranged from 45-65 years of age. Interviews were in a semi-structured format to talce
into account different discussions based on what the participants wanted to talk about. Interview
questions addressed American Indian health knowledge, personal understanding of diabetes, and
health-seeking behaviors. Interviews began with general questions about health and illness,
signs and symptoms of illness, experiences with illness and healing, and personal definitions and
opinions about various health topics. The second major area of questions introduced the topic of
diabetes to the participant. Participants were asked to elaborate on their knowledge and
understanding of diabetes disease etiology, diagnosis, co-morbid conditions, prevention,
education, social meaning, and treatment options. Interview generally ran from a half hour to
one hour in duration at a quiet location on the University of Pennsylvania campus by the choice
of the participant. Participants that currently were in New Mexico, Arizona, and Alaska at the
time of interview were interviewed over the phone. Interviews were then transcribed and coded
for common thematic elements across all interviews. Direct quotes will not be used in the
following section of the paper due to a request by one of the participants.

Him-Dale 22
Through the narratives of the American Indian participants from New Mexico, Arizona,
and Alaska, I will construct an explanatory model that reflects the lmowledge, attitudes, and
beliefs about diabetes that is applicable not only to Indian Communities of the represented
participants but also to the Pima Indians of the Ak-Chin Indian Community and the general
Indian Community of the United States.

Consensus on sugar

Generally, there was a basic understanding of the pathophysiology of diabetes. Most
participants articulated a relationship between insulin and sugar in the body and knew that
insulin production had decreased in diabetes. All study participants believed that diet regulation
was very important in the treatment of type II diabetes. The participants who were in their 20s
gave more in-depth biochemical responses than the older participants who often phrased the
relationship as something to do with sugar being bad for the body and insulin is not taking it
away. The younger participants often learned these concepts at school, diabetes prevention fairs
at the community center, and media messages.

Consensus on genetics

When asked, "What do you think is the cause of diabetes?" all the study participants gave
an answer that touched upon the thrifty gene hypothesis. Because diabetes mellitus was
uncommon among the Pima Indians until the second half of the 20th century, several theories on
the etiology of diabetes in American Indians have been debated (Pratley 1998: 177). The
observation that diabetes in the Pima Indians is strongly familial favors a genetic basis for the
disease (Knowler, Pettit, Bennett, & Williams, 1983: 110). A frequently cited genetic basis for

Him-Dak 23
type II diabetes in Pima Indians is the "thrifty gene" that predisposes them to diabetes as their
lifestyle changes. This thrifty gene hypothesis, presented in 1962 by geneticist J. V. Neel,
proposes a "thrifty" genotype suited to the feast and famine conditions of early hunter-gatherer
existence, either through a quick insulin trigger, a fewer receptor cells for glucose, or enhanced
fat metabolism. In a time of varying food supply, this would have been advantageous in that
excess glucose would be stored as fat when food was plentiful and that fat would be used as
energy when food was scarce. Because this enhances survival and reproduction, the individual
with the "thrifty gene" has a better chance of surviving and reproducing. However, it remains
unclear in what ways the thrifty hypothesis applies to American Indians. The "New World
Syndrome" is posed as another explanation for type II diabetes insofar as it is one of a number
associated with the staggering changes in diet, culture, and health of American Indians upon
European settlement of North America (Jackson 1994:383). Collectively these findings suggest
that type II diabetes has a substantial genetic basis in Pima Indians.
Theories and paradigms on the emergence and maintenance of health and disease patterns
like the thrifty gene hypothesis affect individuals and shape individuals' self-knowledge. The
Pima Indians are arguably the most studied population group in diabetes for the past 50 years.
This perpetuates discrimination and negative attitudes towards what it means to be a Pima
Indian. David Kozak (1997) had conducted ethnographic interview with Pimas on the topic of
diabetes and has suggested the concept of surrender to describe the Pima approach to its
prevention and treatment. In this context, surrender is an emotion whereby individuals and a
segment of a community feel unable to control what they perceive as an inevitable fact of life
that lies outside of their direct influence. This is not to say that these people have given up on
life in a fatalistic sense, nor is it simply learned helplessness. Rather, emotionally, they have

Him-Dak 24
created a hypothetical life history of themselves where they expect to be sickened by, and to die
from, diabetes because the weight of day-to-day experiences throughout their lifetime reveals
this to be an appropriate and accurate assessment. Josie's statement of expecting diabetes with
her experiences with her family and with researchers reflects this sense of surrender.
There are several problems that exist with the hypothesis of a genetic basis for type II
diabetes in light of the complexity of diabetes etiology. For the thrifty genotype hypothesis,
there is little evidence that early hunter-gatherers experienced the periodic starvation that would
favor an insulin resistant gene. For the New World Syndrome argument, the rapid increases in
the prevalence of diabetes during this century and the clear indications that changes in lifestyle
contributed to this phenomenon seem incongruent with a clear genetic basis for type II diabetes
in the Pima Indians (Wilson, Graham, Booth, and Gohdes, 1994:497). There are numerous other
obstacles in identifying genes causing type II diabetes in the Pima Indians including an unclear
inheritance pattern, the effect of mnltiple genes, and strong environmental effects (Wilson,
Graham, Booth, and Gohdes 1994:497). Despite the lack of conclnsive evidence, the genetic
contributions to modern rates of diabetes have been overemphasized in the past, contribnting to a
sense that this disease is inevitable across all American Indian populations.
In addition to the problems of a sense of inevitability and surrender, the thrifty gene
hypothesis points to diabetes as a contact disease with Anglo settlers. The responses of the
participants often idealized the conditions of pre-contact life without the temptations of bad food
and sedentary lifestyle.

Him-Dak25
Consensus on food
Sugar and fat were emphasized as causes of diabetes in all the participants' responses.
Although there is no definitive evidence that the adoption of an Anglo diet leads to a risk of
developing diabetes to the Pima Indians, the protective function of the traditional lifestyle
hunter-gatherer-horticulturalists is more widely accepted (Smith-Morris 2001:201).
Many Pima health problems can be attributed to commodities brought by European
explorers and colonists. The circulation of many new food commodities has affected the Pima
diet. These new commodities were brought not only from merchants but especially in the form
of federal food supplements to Indian Reservations as American Indians experienced difficulty in
sustaining themselves without land or resources that were forcibly taken away. Foods from
federal and state-administered distribution programs included: eggs, bacon, potatoes, lard,
cheese, beans, carrned meats, vegetables and fruits, dry cereals, dried or evaporated milk
(Jackson 1994:387-388).
Caroline Smith-Morris describes the details and significance of the Pima food pathways
(2005:38). Traditional food like beans and frybread are symbolic of social and religious
gatherings, and many Pima cooks take great pride in their fry bread and are generous with a
variety of other fried and sweet food. To please one's guests and family with food is the
centerpiece of good hosting and is quintessentially the Pima way. Certain foods are associated
with affluence or comfort and would therefore be particularly valued by hosts and guests alike.
These foods can increase the symbolic importance of an event and may improve a host's status.
The serving of food to visitors is a common and serious obligation among many American
Indian groups. Declining food that is offered can be a significant social error regardless of a
person's diabetes status. Thinness can be a sign of weakness or of poverty in some American

Him-Dak 26
Indian communities. And amongst all peoples, diet can be a way to re-establish or break ties
with tradition in a rapidly changing world. In the case of the Pima, who have experienced some
of the greatest acculturative pressures of all the Southwest tribes due to their length and form of
contact with Europeans, definitions of Indian-ness are drawn from historical and environmental
contexts that include a political economy of health. Foods that are associated with the past,
tradition, or Pima authenticity carry great symbolic value. The nutritional content of such foods
is often useless to attach because it is not for nutrition sake that they are so carefully prepared,
served, and consumed.
The relationship between tribes and their cultures of food are a result of their millennialong direct relationship to the land. While it may appear to be an ironic contradiction that there
is reluctance to change food habits, given the commonly expressed idea that "white man's foods
have made us sick," foods and food pathways constitute complex codes for social relations and
symbols of cultural identity during a time of deprivation. Diabetes, especially as it affects food
patterns, appears to have provided the Pima Indians and other American Indian populations with
another means through which to reflect and comment upon matters of continual concern
regarding their history and their place with respect to the majority of society (Lang 1990).

Consensus on loneliness

The participants commented that they never saw their friends and family members with
diabetes take their medications in full view. Rather, medications were taken behind closed doors
or when people had left the common area. Caroloyn Smith-Morris also comments on this lonely
diabetic life of the Pima in her dissertation (2001 :184). Diabetics attempt to balance disease
management with some traditional aspects of Pima life. Changes related to diabetes prevention

Him-Dak27
and management like diet changes, exercise, medication, glucose monitoring are changes that a
diabetic has to do alone, making changes that much more difficult in a culture that valorizes
sociability and togetherness as the Pima do. This makes diabetes a lonely concern. Families and
friends do not typically help or change along with the patient. This is not to say that families are
not sympathetic; they are. Families show concern and support by providing rides and company
at appointments, child care, and most often a non-judgmental "live and let live" attitude toward
behaviors and choices. But there is a strong personal modesty which prevents diabetics from
sharing their disease experience with others.

Consensus on morality

Participants also mentioned the importance of following through with the physicians
orders because it was good to take care of the body as much as possible. The ideological
premises of biomedicine take on a moral character outlining what it defines a good person and
patient. This is particularly true for diabetes because it is a disease that can and should be
managed by the patient or he will be marked non-compliant and at fault for contributing to his
own demise.

Formation of identity

These responses have indicated that diabetes is a part of being Pima/American Indian,
gives opportunities to resist Anglo culture through food pathways during a time of deprivation,
isolates sick individuals, and judges morality based on compliance.
The next section will discuss the current situation of the Pima Indians.

Him-Dak28
Current: natural resources

Although patches of the Ak-Chin Indian farming community had subsisted in the
Sonoran Desert around shallow wells, pumping around Phoenix lowered the water table
hundreds of feet, making farming too expensive to maintain by the 1960s. The Ak-Chin Indian
Community then decided to sue the federal government citing the 1908 Supreme Court Winters
doctrine which states the reservation of enough water to irrigate the land for farming. Congress
granted the tribe 75,000 acre-feet of water per year from the Central Arizona Project and a
Colorado River entitlement, and the precious water finally arrived by 1987 (Central Arizona
Project 2005). These water rights have changed the Ak-Chin Indian Community by lowering
unemployment from 3 8 percent to four percent, tripling farming lands, and encouraging selfsufficiency within two years of implementation (Carrier 1991) (Figure 8). Furthermore, other
Arizona tribes have been encouraged to demand their own water rights from the federal
government after a century of inadequate water service through the success of the Ak-Chin
Indian community.

A

.

-

-

.

'

____

.....,

FIG 8. A ) A vi ew of a cotton field on the reservati on and B) irrigation canal of the AA-Chin Indian Community.

Him-Dak 29
Current: Autonomy

The U.S. Public Health Service under the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services took charge oflndian health care in 1955 from the Indian Service, which had proven to
be unable to manage Indian health and health care resulting in inadequate supplies, personnel,
and communication for the Indians. In 1970, the Public Health Service was replaced by the
Indian Health Service (IHS), and Indian Health Boards were created to ensure tribal input was
obtained for IHS decisions. Due to the Indian Self-Determination Act of 1974, IHS funds were
directly distributed to many tribal health facilities and services on reservations through contracts,
and many tribes assumed the responsibility of managing and administering health care with HIS
allocated funds tlrrough 63 8 compacts. This has removed much of the responsibility and control
for tribal health services away from IHS to tribes. The Pima Indians of the Gila River
Reservation have taken over their own health care system and have created the Gila River Health
Care Corporation, which oversees all of the health services and facilities on the reservation. The
Gila River Health Care Corporation currently manages and funds the Ak-Chin Health Clinic.
The Self-Determination Act has also affected health research with the Ak-Chin Indian
Community as researchers are prohibited from arriving to reservation to conduct studies without
prior announcement, permission, and supervision. Researchers must follow the tribal council's
appropriate mechanisms for review, approval, and supervision including committees,
appointments, protocol development, and feedback requirements to return research findings back
to the community. This has made gaining permission to conduct research in the Ak-Chin Indian
Community very difficult and a time- and resource-intense process. After submitting an in-depth
research proposal that emphasizes the accessible benefits (and risks) of the project to the
community, there are a series of seemingly endless reviews and meetings which usually take six

Him-Dak 30
months to a year to follow through. The few researchers that are not rejected from this approval
process must continue to work out plans for supervision and data reporting/management for
another six months to a year reflecting the high level of consensus decision-making with some of
the community's most vocal elders and key leaders.
In addition to authority granted directly from the Self-Determination Act, the Ak-Chin
community has also exerted strong sovereignty over economic affairs. Proposition 202 has
permitted Indian tribes to make and keep special financial arrangements with casinos. The AkChin Community had permitted Harrah's to build a casino on reservation land in exchange for a
set percentage of gaming revenues since the mid- l 990s. Through this source of revenue, the AkChin Indian community has provided funding for education, transportation, health care services,
public safety, and economic development for the greater community (Peters 2004:3).

Current: Identity
The Ak-Chin Indian Community established the first Eco-Museum in the United States in
1991 by including the surrounding region as a supplement to the museum building (Figure 8).
The material and oral collections of this "museum without walls" directly come from and are
maintained by the community. The word Him-Dak means "way of life," and the Ak-Chin HimDak Eco-Museum reflects the community's definitions of its values, priorities, and identities
through a sharing of the past, present, and future and serves to further aspirations of selfdetermination. There is a great sense of community's ownership to the Eco-Museum as the
community has studied, conserved, exhibited, revitalized, and strengthened its own culture and
identity. There is also a great sense of need to preserve traditions of the past and present for the

Him-Dak31
future as shown by the desire to revitalize the native O' odham language among community
members (Figure 9).

~
&
FIG 8. A ) Ak-Chin Hi m-Oak Eco-Museum. B ) Feast House. CJ St. Francis of Assisi Catholic
Church.

Is it important thatthe Community make efforts to
teach the O'odham language to people that don 't
know the language?

90%

2%
2%

□

Agree Strongly

□

Agree

o Disagree Strongly

o No Ans-vver
FIG 9. A) Data taken from Ak-Chi n O'odham Runner survey in March 2004.

Him-Dak 32
Critique

The Pima Indians have been progressively driven to transitioning from a self-sufficient
farming lifestyle to a dependence on a cash economy. The exploitation of natural resources,
namely water and land, by the imperialistic federal government literally left Pima farms dry and
unable to compete with the capitalistic marketplace. Farmers were then forced to shift from a
farming occupation and lifestyle to that of sedentary wage work. Furthermore, this transition
lead to dependence on the federal government for aid and on manufactured and processed goods
produced off the reservation.
At the same time of these material and autonomy losses, there was a loss in identity and
culture from a period of forced assimilation. Although children often were voluntarily placed in
off-reservation boarding schools due to family instability like financial difficulties, death, and
alcoholism, these children often lost more in these "institutions of reform." There was a loss in
parenting and traditional family structure, language, and cultural identity. The intent of placing
children in boarding schools during this time was to change the child so that he could affect his
family, both parents and future children, when the child returned to the reservation with Anglo
ideals. However, this intended effect did not occur and instead resulted in confused and broken
families filled with shame of being an American Indian.
However with the outgrowth of the Indian Self-Determination Act for the past three
decades and other acts of retribution given to the American Indian communities by the federal
government, many of these losses have been addressed in American Indian populations. The
Pima Indians of the Ak-Chin Indian Community have repossessed water rights and farm lands
and sovereignty and also demonstrated dedication in preserving and honoring the traditional past,
present, and future. The Pima have shown economic and political independence by acculturating

Him-Dak 33
only enough to gain control over some of the forces that determine their political economic
status. Acculturating in this case has consisted of participating in capitalistic ventures, speaking
English, self-governing the community through a system imposed by colonial pressures, working
with the government bureaucracy and funding, and engaging with dominant government and
economic forces continually. But in the midst of it all, they have recovered, re-formulated, and
maintained their cultural identity. Particularly through the diabetes epidemic, there has been a
tension in balancing the need and desire for biomedical health services against the growing
insistence on self-determination and distinct cultural identity (Smith-Morris 2001: 205).
I was wrong in interpreting Josie's words at the Feast House when I concluded that she
was trying to frame the diabetes identity as her and her community's him-dak. Him-Dak is not
about fighting diabetes on a day-to-day basis. Rather, it is the tension between maintaining and
negotiating a cultural identity amidst a history filled with structural violence and
disenfranchisement, the current meanings and isolating effects of diabetes, and future
opportunities provided by a resurgence in autonomy, resources, and identity. This is the new
Him-Dak of the Pima Indians (Figure 10) (Figure 11).

Him-Dak.34

I

1

•

FIG. 10 Wall of community pictures celebrating memories of community members.

FIG 11. Growing cluster of homes in the town of Maricopa right across the borders of the reservation
(less than 5 miles). Note blue dots are backyard outdoor pools.

Him-Dak 35

Conclusion with a world perspective
The biomedical view of the Pima body is that of a diseased state and one that is
fundamentally different in genetics, physiology, and lifestyle patterns from others. However, the
manifestation of illness and disease is more than the result of abnormal biochemical pathways; it
is also in part the result of egregious expressions of structural violence and unequal power
dynamics. The creation of inequality of the Pima Indians of the Ak-Chin Indian Community
through the loss of natural resources, autonomy, and identity/culture mirrors the experience of
many American Indian groups and other colonized indigenous populations groups all over the
world.
Dependency theory outlines that the development of advanced capitalist countries is to a
considerable degree at the expense of the masses of people in the underdeveloped nations. The
underdevelopment of health in certain populations in capitalist countries is an inevitable
consequence of the depletion of natural and human resources that accompanies imperialism
(Baer 1982: 15). According to Oscar Gish (1979:210), it is becoming increasingly clear that in
the Third World, improved health is not primarily a matter of medical systems, but rather a
broader question requiring better understanding of the nature of underdevelopment itself. These
structural barriers constructed by imperialism combined with the physiologic effect of traumatic
experiences have left the bodies of indigenous peoples all over the world vulnerable to illness
and disease.
This paper has attempted to analyze the impact of the political and economic forces that
pattern relationships and behaviors while remaining accountable to the cultural meanings and
experiences of the Ak-Chin Indian Community of Arizona with the current diabetes epidemic.
However, this story and analysis is not only of this community but also of the American Indian

Him-Dak 36
Community and of colonized indigenous people all over the world. The special contributions
provided by anthropology lies not only in its ability to explore first hand the immediate
experiences, interpretive systems, motivations for actions, behavioral repertoires, and ecological
and social relations oflocal actors. Rather, it is the opportunity to investigate all of these aspects
of human life in relation to each other and to the broader and cross-cutting set ofpoliticaleconomic relations that condition their very nature (Singer and Baer 1995:73). There is a need to
move the question from how people's socioeconomic status is related to health status to ask why
are some people poor in the first place, why do some get sick when others do not, why are some
able to cope with problems when others cannot, and how poverty and poor health are mutually
causative and constituted (Leatherman 2005:50).

Him-Dak 37
References

Ak-Chin Diabetes Prevention Program
2004 Monthly newsletter to Community (January).
Ak-Chin Farm Board
2004 Ak-Chin Farms. Ak-Chin O'odham Runner, October 1-14:8.
Baer, Hans A.
1982 On the Political Economy of Health. Medical Anthropology Newsletter 14(1 ): 11-2, 1317.
Canby, William C. Jr.
1988 American Indian Law in a Nutshell. St. Paul, MN: West Publishing Company.
Carrier, Jim
1991 The Colorado: A River Run Dry. National Geographic, June:4-32.
Center for Disease Control and Prevention
2005a National diabetes fact sheet. Electronic document,
http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pubs/estimates.htm#prev4, accessed October 25 th , 2005.
Center for Disease Control and Prevention
2005b Summary health statistics for U.S. adults: National health interview survey, 2003.
Electronic document, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr I 0/sr IO 225 .pdf, accessed
October 251\ 2005.
Central Arizona Project
2005 CAP Sub-contracting Status Report. Electronic document,
http://www.cap-az.com/about/index.cfm?action=allocations&subSection=7, accessed
January 20 th , 2006.
de Beer, Cedric
1986 The South African Disease. Trenton: African World Press, 1nc.
Elling, Ray H.
1980 Cross-National Study of Health Systems. New Brunswick: Transaction Books.
Ferriera, Mariana Kawall Leal
1996 Sweet Tears and Bitter Pills: The Politics of Health Among the Yuroks ofNorthem
California. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Medical Anthropology, University of
California, Berkeley.
Gaines, Atwood D. and Robert A. Hahn
1983 Among the Physicians: Encounter, Exchange, and Transformation. In Physicians of
Western Medicine: Anthropological Approaches to Theory and Practice, Robert A. Hahn

Him-Dak38
Atwood D. Gaines, eds. Pp. 3-22. Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publishing Co.

Garrett, Michael Tianus ta and Eugene F. Pichette
2000 Red as an Apple: American Acculturation and Counseling with or without Reservation.
Journal of Counseling and Development 78(1):3-13.
Gish, Oscar
1979 The Political Economy of Primary Health Care and "Healthy by the People": A
Historical Exploration. Social Science & Medicine 13C:203-21 l.
Harris, S. B.
1998 What works? Success stories in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Diabetic Medicine 15(4):s20s23.
Hertzberg, Hazel W.
1971 The Search for an American-Indian Identity: Modern Pan-Indian Movements. Syracuse:
Syracuse University Press.
Inter Tribal Council of Arizona, Inc.
2003 Ak-Chin Indian Community. Electronic document,
http://www.itcaonline.com/tribes_akchin.html, accessed January 20th, 2006.
Jackson, M. Y.
1994 Diet, culture, and diabetes. In Diabetes as a disease of civilization: The impact of culture
change on indigenous peoples. J. R. Joe & R. S. Young, eds. Pp.381-406. Berlin,
Germany: Mouton de Gruyter.
Joe, Jennie R. & Robert S. Young
1994 Introduction. In Diabetes as a Disease of Civilization: The Impact of Culture Change on
Indigenous Peoples. Jennie R. Joe & Robert S. Young, eds. Pp.1-18. Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Kelman, Sander
1975 The Social Nature of the Definition Problem in Health. International Journal of Health
Services 5 :625-642.
Knowler, W. C., D. J. Pettit, P.H. Bennett, and R.C. Williams
1983 Diabetes mellitus in the Pima Indians: Genetic and evolutionary considerations.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 62:107-114.
Kozak, David L.
1997 Surrendering to Diabetes: An Embodied Response to Perceptions of Diabetes and Death
in the Gila River Indian Community. OMEGA: The Journal of Death and Dying
35(4):347-359.

Him-Dak39
Lang, Gretchen Chesley
1989 "Making Sense" About Diabetes: Dakota Narratives of Illness. Medical Anthropology
11 :305-327.
Leatherman, Thomas
2005 A Space of Vulnerability in Poverty and Health: Political-Ecological and Biocultural
Analysis. ETHOS 33(1): 46-70.
McKenzie, Fayette Avery
1914 The Assimilation of the American Indian. American Journal of Sociology 19(6):761772.
Morsy, Soheir
1990 A Political Economy in Medical Anthropology. In Medical Anthropology:
Contemporary Theory and Method. Carolyn M. Sargent and Thomas M. Johnson, eds.
Pp. 26-46. New York: Praeger.
Narayan, K. M.
1997 Diabetes mellitus in Native Americans: The problem and its implications. Population
Research and Policy Review 116:169-192.
Navarro, Vicente
1976 Medicine Under Capitalism. New York: Prodist.
Newman, J.M., F. DeStefano, S. E. Valway, R.R. German, and B. Muneta
1993 Diabetes-associated mortality in Native Americans. Diabetes Care 16:297-299.
Peters, Jearrnette
2004 Community Distributes Casino Revenues. Ak-Chin O'odham Rurrner, June 4: 17:3.
Pratley, R. E.
1998 Gene-environment interactions in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes mellitus: lessons
learned from the Pima Indians. Proceedings of the Nutrition Society 57: 175-181.
Pratt, Richard Hemy
1987 Battlefield and Classroom: Four Decades with the American Indian, 1867-1904.
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Poss, Jane and Mary Ann Jezewski
2000 Role and Meaning of Susto in Mexican Americans' Explanatory Model of Type 2
Diabetes. Medical Anthropology Quarterly 16(3):360-377.
Rock, Melanie
2003 Sweet Blood and Social Suffering: Rethinking Cause-Effect Relationships in Diabetes,
Distress, and Duress. Medical Anthropology 22: 131-174.

Him-Dak41
1994 Community approaches to diabetes prevention. In Diabetes as a disease of civilization:
The impact of culture change on indigenous peoples. J. R. Joe & R. S. Young eds.
Pp.495-503. Berlin, Germany: Mouton de Gruyter.
World Health Organization
2002 Diabetes Mellitus. Electronic document,
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs 13 8/en/index.html., accessed December 1,
2005.

Him-Dak40
Scheder, Jo C.
1988 A Sickly-Sweet Harvest: Farmworker Diabetes and Social Equality. Medical
Anthropology Quarterly 2(3):251-277.
Scheper-Hughes, Nancy and Margaret Lock
1986 Making "Truth" to Illness: Metaphors, Reification, and a Pedagogy for Patients ..
Medical Anthropology Quarterly 17:137-140.
Scheper-Hughes, Nancy and Margaret Lock
1987 The Mindful Body: A Prolegomenon to Future Work in Medical Anthropology. Medical
Anthropology Quarterly 1 :6-41.
Schiller, Nina Glick
1991 What's Wrong with This Picture? The Hegemonic Construction of Culture in AIDS
Research in the United States. Medical Anthropology Quarterly 6(3):237-254.
Singer, Merrill and Hans A. Baer
1995 Critical Gaze. In Critical Medical Anthropology. Merrill Singer and Hans A. Baer, eds.
Pp. 59-112. Amityville: Baywood Publishing Co.
Smith-Morris, Carolyn Markee
2001 A Political Economy of Diabetes, Pregnancy and Identity in the Gila River Indian
Community. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of Arizona.
Smith-Morris, Carolyn Markee
2005 Reducing Diabetes in Indian Country: Lessons from the Three Domains Influencing
Pima Diabetes. Human Organization 63(1 ):34-46.
Taussig, Michael
1978 The Devil and Commodity Fetishism in South America. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press.
Taylor, Tonya Nicole
2006 Major Sub-Field Concentration: Medical Anthropology. Critical Medical Anthropology
Course Hand-Out. University of Pennsylvania.
U.S. Census Bureau
2000 Profile of General Demographic Characteristics of Maricopa (Ak-Chin) Reservation,
AZ: 2000. Electronic document, http://censtats.census.gov/data/AZ/05004013 .pdf,
accessed February 101\ 2006.
Waitzkin, H.
1981 The Social Origins of Illness: A Neglected History. International Journal of Health
Services 11:77-103.
Wilson, R., C. Graham, K. G. Booth, & D. Gohdes

