Anthropology Senior Theses

University of Pennsylvania

ScholarlyCommons
Department of Anthropology

Spring 2006

Identity, Relationships and Culture in the Camden County Jail
Alison Peters
University of Pennsylvania

Follow this and additional works at: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses

Q

Part of the Anthropology Commons

Recommended Citation
Peters, Alison, "Identity, Relationships and Culture in the Camden County Jail" (2006). Anthropology Senior
Theses. Paper 69.

This paper is posted at ScholarlyCommons. https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/69
For more information, please contact repository@pobox.upenn.edu.

Identity, Relationships and Culture in the Camden County Jail
Disciplines
Anthropology

This thesis or dissertation is available at ScholarlyCommons: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/69

Identity, Relationships and Culture
in the Camden County Jail
Alison Peters

Senior Thesis
May 2nd , 2006

,,
,,"
,.""
••
...

..

••
;.•
•••

•

····"·--··

..

INTRODUCTION

I set out to do my senior thesis regarding inmate identity. My hypothesis was that
some people who have been arrested and sentenced to jailtime will increase their social
status/self identity, while other people will find incarceration detrimental to their social
status/self identity. My initial thesis was whether or not incarceration affects a person's
self identity, and status within a group .
. However, as I started interviewing inmates at the Camden County Correctional
Facility, I found a common theme in each inmate's story. Every inmate I interviewed, as
well as many of the guards, told me essentially, "everyone knows everyone here". All the
inmates know each other "from the street" and all the inmates know at least most of the
guards. The inmates and guards went to high school together, played on sports teams
together, are·fonner employees/employers, in-laws and even blood relatives. This creates
a unique social situation, in which identity and status are still crucially important.

PART I - PHILOSOPHY AND GENERAL BACKGROUND

Although a person may have control over committing a crime, the act of being
arrested is not directly controlled by the person. In this way, being arrested and thus
incarceration is an extremely unique life changing event Rather than joining the army, or
pursuing a certain profession where an individual can direct the course of the life
changing event, the act of being incarcerated allows for little personal control. Therefore,
I chose to study whether or not incarceration affects a person's self identity, and status
within a ·group. However, I believe that although some groups of people feel fewer social
consequences of being arrested, I do not believe that (most) people commit crimes for the
sole purpose of being arrested in order to change their status within their social/cultural
.'

group. Therefore, imprisonment is unique and should be studied.
·. Toe concept of "identity" in anthropology is certainly ambiguous. In one sense,

,.:}t!\~-~nea'of self.:identity portrays the idea that a person is distinct from all other
, , ,,_~viilsDOmthe other hand, "ethnic" or "group" identity confers a sense of sharing
., . -;~i'fy,ior!'sameness". This observation is made by Richard Robbins in Cultural

1

-

•
Anthropology: A Problem Based Approach. In fact many social and cultural
anthropological encyclopedias and dictionaries do not even bother listing the concept of
"identity". In one encyclopedia that did list the concept of identity, the editors stated

l

I

" [w]hile the tenn 'identity' is frequently employed by anthropologists to refer to selthood

~

in a loosely Eriksonian way, the concept is usually treated more sociologically,

t

emphasizing the individual's social and cultural surroundings, and the mechanisms of

►

socialization and cultural acquisition." (Barnard and Spencer 292) However, two terms

t

•
•
-

•.,

:.

••
:t
t
t

t'
•"

far more prevalent in anthropological literature are the ideas of "person" and "self' .
Although commonly used throughout anthropological literature, «the notion of
'person', 'self' and consequently, 'self-identity' have been described as somewhat
ambiguous, and there is little consensus within the discipline over how they should be
used" (Levinson and Ember 922) However, a general consensus is that the "self" is
"lowest abstract level of the cultural conception of society" (Levinson and Ember 922)
The founders of these concepts in anthropological literature are Emile Durkheim
regarding "person", and Marcle Mauss and Erik Erikson regarding the concept of "self'.
Durkheim believed that people have distinct social personalities, which is the "person".
This is similar to William James' theory regarding the "self'. James believes that
each person has three distinct selves-- the material self, the social self and the spiritual
self. The most relevant "self' in the William James definition, is the "social self'. James
understands this "self' to be the individual one presents to the world. However, a person
can have as many social selves as there are social situations. For example, I can have the
social self of a daughter to my parents, a student to my professors, and a friend to my
friends. I can even have a different "friend" '"self' depending on the friend with whom I
am interacting. William James published these ideas in 1925.
In 1989, Grace Gredys Harris' proposed the idea that "personhood" is a person
with a status quality. This is extremely relevant to my thesis, as once someone is
incarcerated there status quality changes. However, for my research, I would like to
understand "self' and ''person" as the faces one puts on when interacting with other
members of the society. One can have many different "persons" or ''selves" and these
· ·. ••persons" and/or "selves" can and indeed must change according to the people with

;~~9~ ~ certain individual is interacting.

2

Therefore, does being incarcerated force an individual to change every single
conception of self, or just certain "selves"? After an individual is arrested and
incarcerated does the person change his or her "child-self' (the way this person interacts
with a parent) or "neighbor-self' or any self? Does being incarcerated cause the
individual to feel the need to alter any self, or all selves or only some of the selves? As
Cohen asks, "is identity merely transient and ephemeral?" (Cohen., 3) Does that fact that
the inmates are so closely connected to the officers in both culture and identity change
the environment of the jail?
Another vital component to my research is the idea of class and status. The
society in which we live in the United States is most certainly a stratified society
containing a hierarchy of classes. However, there is no consensus on how many classes
this hierarchy holds. Anthropologists tend to agree that there is an upper, middle and
lower class. Boundaries are often drawn using income, education, profession, language
and even clothes to distinguish these classes. Within these classes is the concept of status.
Status is one's position in society. Status affects a person's role in society and in
some anthropological definitions, a person's access and control over resources. RadcliffeBrown provides a definition consisting of class and status as the arrangement of persons
in controlled and defined relationships.
Jail is important because it has the ability to change a person's status. Once a
person is incarcerated they move from an "innocent" status, to the status of a convict.
This type of role is permanent, the same way the role of a child is permanent A person
will always be someone's child. Even though a person might be freed from jail for forty
or fifty years, they still bear the title of convict. The role applies to anyone who has been
incarcerated- anyone who has been "convicted".

It is essential for my thesis research to understand that there are different social
classes, and these classes change a person's status when that person is in jail. It is
possible that the effect of being incarcerated significantly reflects the individual's status
outside the jail. If a person is in a subculture which incarceration is looked upon as a rite
of passage, or not a big deal, then I hypothesis that that individual will not suffer any
negative status change, and thus not change any of his or her "selves". However, if an
individual is in a subculture which looks negatively on incarceration, or which has social

3

.....

controls that do not allow for incarceration, that specific individual may feel the need to
alter one or more of his or her "'selves". The changing of one or more of these "selves"
maibe a possible mechanism to cope with his or her status changing to a less desirable
level.
Certainly, the concept of "self' and the notion of status play a crucial role in my
senior thesis project. This research is to understand what is going on at the level of the
individual, in the way that the individual interacts with other members of the group when
that person is incarcerated. As was stated in Encyclopedia of Cultural Anthropology,
"... 'persons' are aspects of the ideologies of cultures; different cultures attribute different
features to personhood, and it remains for the anthropologist to discover what these
features are, how they are revealed in social practice and cultural acts, and how they are
constructed and evaluated within the ideology of the culture" (Levinson and Ember 922).
Social control is another interesting concept within anthropology. In order to
control individuals with social boundaries, Foley (quoted in Encyclopedia of Cultural
Anthropology) believes "an individual learns the nonns of the group" (Levinson and
I

Ember, 1194). Therefore, social control begins with enculturation. Once a person knows
what is acceptable and what is intolerable in a culture, certain behaviors and actions can
be manipulated to control individuals. For example, in some social groups, being
incarcerated may be intolerable. Therefore, members of the group can use the threat of
being arrested as a means of social control - one can threaten another individual by
saying that person will be arrested. Because being arrested is negative, it works as a
method to controlthat person. However, if being arrested is not unacceptable in the social
group, then the threat and act of being arrested do not serve as a social control.
Although some people use the word 'jail" interchangeably with the word
"prison", these two facilities have very different functions. Jails are locally operated
correctional facilities that confine people both before trial and sometimes after trial.
When a person is arrested for a crime he or she is sent to jail until arraignment. If a
person does not make bail or post a bond, that person is required to stay in the jail until
the trial. For crimes that require sentencing ofless than one year, often individuals are
sentenced to jaHrather than prison. Such crimes include child support violations,
parole/probation violations, and other misdemeanor crimes. Jails are also used as holding

...
4

facilities for inmates that are being transferred from one city or county to another. People
are most often in jail for one year or less. At the Camden County Correctional Facility,
(_ inmates are required to be residing in the jail no more than 364 days. However, both
officers and inmates told me that some people have been in the Camden jail for up to four
years awaiting their trials. Prisons, according to the Federal Bureau of Prisons Webpage,
are state or federally operated facilities that confine people who have been sentenced to
one year or more of incarceration. Often, inmates in prisons are convicted of felony
crimes. "Felonies are severe crimes subject to punishment of a year or more in prison"
(Adler, 27).
To understand the life of someone in jail, a definition of the purpose of jail is
required. Many people agree that jail is a combination of: punishment to the individual
who committed the crime, rehabilitation of the individual so that he or she can function in
the society upon release, protection of the public from a dangerous individual, a deterring
factor for anyone else who might be considering committing a crime. Malcohn Davies, in

Punishing Criminals: Developing Community-Based Intermediate Sanctions notes that,
"the system is simultaneously about punishment and denunciation of the wrongful act,
and the protection of the public through selective incapacitation and deterrence" (Davies,

1).
As Michel Foucault explains in Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison,
punishing criminals evolved from a very public display of humiliation, torture and even
execution, to the private, hidden punishment behind prison walls. Foucault makes the
comparison of, "The guillotine takes life almost without touching the body just as a
prison deprives ofliberty." (Foucault, 13) In a prison, the penalty is not physical pain, but
the punishment of the soul. All liberties are taken away. Within a prison, a person's body
is completely controlled. A prisoner is told what and when to eat, when and where to
sleep, and confined to a small, sterile space.
Foucault also goes on to explain six rules of punishment. First, it must be worse
fonthe. prisoner in prison than the benefit gained from committing the crime. Next, the
.. J)l.lnishmentshould deter other potential criminals. Third, the punishment should hit to the

;c)i~~~1~•t1:ie observer. Fourth, there should be a link between the punishment and the
- '-~;l1Pf.8 Qn should not be over punished for a minor crime, but also should not be
5

given a light punishment for a heinous crime. Fifth, Foucault believes punishment must
be subject to a common truth. Last, all offenses must be classified.
Within the prison system, Foucault also sites Jeremy Bentham and discusses the
idea of the Panopticon. The Panopticon is an architectural structure that allows for the
inmate to be completely isolated, yet allows the guards to watch the inmate at all times.
The structure is to have a guard tower in the center of the facility, watching over every
imnate. The inmate's cells are organized in a way that although each prisoner ideally
cannot see any other prisoner, he or she can always see the guard tower. This is to remind
the prisoner that he or she is always being watched. The idea is that while the prisoner
has no human contact and is utterly alone, he or she never can be truly alone and has no
privacy.
Incarceration is punishment for a number of reasons including isolation, public
knowledge and the indignity of the jail system. Isolation can be agonizing because
movements and actions are regulated and controlled. When a person is incarcerated, it
becomes public knowledge that that person committed some kind of crime. That public
knowledge of the crime can be embarrassing, and punishment in itself For that reason
public shaming, although less overt, is still used today.
For example, the New York Times ran an article publicly renaming white collar
crooks. On the surface, the article appeared to be about the sentencing of former Tyco
chief executive Dennis Kozlowski and ex-chief financial officer, Mark H. Swartz.
However in the first paragraph of the story, the New York Times printed, "the recent
corporate crime spree first made headlines with the disasters at Enron and WorldCom.
Some cried foul when Bernard Ebbers of WorldCom and John Rigas of Adelphia
Communications got sentences that meant those white-haired white-collar criminals
would probably die in prison. Tomorrow night, Martha Stewart's version of the reality
show "The Apprentice" will have its premiere amid her burst of post prison
popularity. " (New York Times 20 September, 2005) The article relists each criminal. This
is most definitely a public shaming tactic.
I want to understand ifbeing incarcerated in jail alters a person's identity, or
status. My hypothesis is that for some social groups jail will actually improve their status .
.<J\s one ex gang member commented after his first arrest, "I'm released back to my 'hood

6

to discover doing time solidified my reputation by proving I'm rugged and raw"
(Simpson, 33). Other scholars have also noted that imprisonment may not be detrimental
to identity and status. Pattillo et al. notes that the prevalence of incarceration makes being
arrested an acceptable event in many people's lives. However, it is possible that
imprisonment will be the force that causes a change in identity. " ... It has been suggested
that the individual may shift positions in the social matrix and that this will lead to a
changed pattern of influences which impinge upon the identity." (Break.well, 40) This is
certainly worthy of research.

PART II - METHODOLOGY AND SPECIFIC BACKGROUND

In September, I decided I wanted to understand more about the social structure
and self identity of incarcerated individuals. Dr. Paula Sabloff who works in the
anthropology department at the University of Pennsylvania agreed to be my advisor.
Although downtown Philadelphia houses a jail, it is a Special Detention facility reserved
for holding inmates for the day of their trial. I thought since inmates move fairly quickly
through these Special Detention centers, (one officer estimated inmates stay no more than
three days) this would not be a good place to conduct research. The next closest jail I
could find was the Camden County Correctional Facility, in Camden, New Jersey.
Last year, Camden, New Jersey passed Detroit to become the city with the highest
crime rate in the United States. Camden is located directly across the Ben Franklin
Bridge, which spans the Delaware River and connects New Jersey to Philadelphia The
land area of Camden is 8.82 square miles, with water area consisting of 1.56 square
miles. This data is from the Home Town Locator Website for Camden, NJ. According to
the 2000 Census, from the United States Census Website, Camden has a population of
79,904 people and 29,769 housing units. Of these 80,000 people, 53.3% consider
themselves Black or African American. New Jersey as a state has 13.6% of the
population considering themselves Black or African American. The census data also
•··):tpdicates that as of 2000, Camden reported having a population that is 16.8% white,
}~~~~~:~%-Hispanic or of Latin origin, 2.5% Asian, 3.9% reporting two or more races, 0.6%

7

...

Native Ame1ican, Native Alaskan, Hawaiian or Pacific Islander and 22.8% reporting
another race.
Although Camden reported only 8.9% of the population being foreign born,
39 .6% of the population of Camden speaks a language other than English in their homes.
While 51.0% of the people in Camden graduated from high school, only 5.4% obtained
an education level of a BA or higher. New Jersey as a whole had a population of 82. l %
which graduated high school, and 29.8% received an education of a BA or higher. For the

I

United States, these statistics are 80.4% graduated high school and 24.4% acquired a BA

~

or higher. The median income for Camden families in 2000 was $23,421, whereas the

~

•

••
'I

•t

•tt

•

=

median income for New Jersey in 2000 was $55,146. The median income for families in
the United States in the year 2000 was $41,994. In 2000, 35.5% of the population living
in Camden was below the poverty line, while the state of New Jersey only had 8.5% of its
. population living below the poverty line. The United States had 12.4% of the population
living below the poverty line in 2000.
Therefore, compared to New Jersey as a state, and the nation as a whole, people in
Camden are significantly less educated, make much less money, and have a greater
chance of living in poverty.
My first impression of Camden was that it was a run down city. Although there
were many old and architecturally beautiful buildings, many of the doors were boarded
up with cardboard and tape. Often the windowpanes were missing glass, and some of the
buildings looked like they had been burned. I was surprised by how many people seemed
to be walking around - Camden did not feel completely dead. There were many motorists
on the streets, as well as pedestrians. Three or four corners I passed had food carts, which
had lines customers. I got the sense that although Camden was a poor area, it was still
alive. I never felt that I was in a particularly dangerous area, nor did I ever feel
intimidated by anyone I met on the streets of Camden.
When I reached the jail, I asked the officer at the door if there was anyone I could
"' \i:~~eak,with regarding interviewing inmates. The officer gave me the phone number of
'' ·"::;ijrYWarden Simon. I called the "DW" multiple times before I was finally able to
.·. ·. "}iWe:set up a meeting, in which I told him I was writing a thesis for my
":'rnajorat

t~e University of Pennsylvania and I was interested in
8

interviewing inmates. He said that it would be no problem at all and to come back
whenever I wanted. I was thrilled that it was so easy. When I met with my advisor, she
instructed me to print out a copy of an IRB exemption form. My advisor and I thought I
would only need an exemption form since I was not publishing any of my work and that I
was an undergraduate student doing a project for my senior thesis. However, inmates are
considered a protected population and require full IRE - Institutional Review Board
approval. A full IRB approval hearing is required for a select group of"test subjects".
Th,ese "special" groups which require more protection include pregnant women, children
under the age of 18, mentally disabled people and prisoners.

It is understandable to include children as a special population. Our own
government considers people under the age of eighteen incapable of making their own
decisions. Eighteen marks legal adulthood, voting rights and the ability to buy tobacco
products. Children under eighteen years old may not understand different aspects of a
~

study they are agreeing to participate in, and therefore need special protection.
Pregnant women are also a protected group. Growing fetuses are especially
vulnerable to medications and actions the mother undergoes. Researches still do not
entirely know how fetuses will react to different treatment. Because of this, pregnant
women are carefully monitored in research and to conduct a study regarding pregnant
women requires more supervision from an organization such as the Institutional Review
Board.
Mentally disabled persons are also an obvious choice for a protected population.
By definition, mentally disabled people have less mental capacity, and thus a more
limited decision making capability, "When people move into a mentai hospital, they enter
a 'marginal state'. They no longer have a place in the social system" (Hubert, 197)
People consider mentally challenged people unable to comprehend scientific content and
deserve special protection.
When others include inmates as a "vulnerable population" this suggests that
inmates are incapable of deciding the course of their own lives. lt is possible that our
society sees inmates as a vulnerable population because the inmates are people who make
::: :P:~9.T:9UQices that put them in jail and thus are incapable of making their own choices

,. :.;~~{~frrding other matters. However, the IRB takes the position that inmates are a
;..-._,t_}> . . ·

9

vulnerable population because they are locked behind closed doors and unable to seek
refuge if the study went too far or became uncomfortable.
As with patients in a mental institution, when people are locked away in a prison
or a jail, they lose their position in society. Instead of being a teacher, lawyer, mother or
father, in the eyes of society, that person becomes only a resident in a mental hospital or
correctional facility. That person fails to function in society, or provide any type of
services, which make them a teacher or a mother. That person can no longer be in the
classroom, or provide for their children. Because there is no giving back to the society, an
incarcerated person loses that part of their identity. " ... People who enter this marginal
state are then perceived as both vulnerable and dangerous" (Hubert, 197). This concept of
being marginalized certainly applies to both mental patients as well as inmates.
To comply with the Review Board, I downloaded a number of forms including
"subpart C'', which deals with "Research involving prisoners". (Appendix G). Most of
the forms are set up for researchers conducting medical or psychological tests on
prisoners. Clearly there has been a history of research abuse toward prisoners, such as the
victims of the Nazis in concentration camps. However, even though my research is purely
ethnographic, and undergraduate work, I still had to complete the IRB approval. '"Subpart
C" is designed to eliminate studies that would give prisoners special treatment for
agreeing to participate, studies that a non~incarcerated person would not want to
participate in, or studies that would unfairly select prisoners. Since the conditions of my
thesis were met with approval I was allowed to go on.
In the following weeks I met with Nancy Koppelman, a representative of the
Review Board. Since full IRB approval hearings are only held once per month, Nancy
was kind enough to try to get my study expedited by sending my information solely to the
"Prison Representative", Mr. Inez. Together, Nancy and I went through a nine page
packet called '"Social & Behavioral Sciences IRB Protocol Summary Guidelines and
Template". (Appendix H) This packet contained the instructions on how I was to write a
Protocol Summary so that the Board could review my suggested research. I had to
__

, lllpiude my introductions and objectives for my study, as well as the background of

- >H)~~featefo,The Summary instructed me to,

10

...

Discuss the background of research problem, prior published data, and the
nature of the research question as well as the resulting rationale for the
proposed study. / Summarize the available data (published or unpublished,
if available) that could have significance or which is necessary to place the
research in current context of our understanding of the area. / Discuss how
any preliminary data justifies the research (Appendix H).

For the Protocol Summary, I also had to include my study de..'lign, which included the
specific number of subjects to be enrolled, and the duration in tenns of hours, months and
years. The Summary required I create extensive methods for subject selection and
withdrawal. I needed to know exactly what inclusion criteria I wanted, and what would
exclude an inmate from participating. My requirements were that inmates needed to be in
the Camden jail, and over the age of 18. I also had to describe scenarios where subjects
may withdraw and how a subject should do that.
Also included were my method, and any instruments I would use. I had to
guarantee that privacy of the inmates would be protected. With the exception of Dr. Paula
Sabloff, Nancy Koppelman, Deputy Warden Simon and Mr. Inez, all names have been
changed. With the exception of Philadelphia and Camden, all towns and cities have also
been changed. I assured the Review Board that I had taken sufficient measures to protect
any evidence that may connect the inmates to my study. I agreed to keep my notes in a
locked file cabinet in Dr. Sabloff's office. I made sure to conduct my interviews in a
sound proof room.
Since I did not do a statistical analysis or have any publication plans, I did not
have to explicitly describe these in my Protocol Summary. I did however, have to
painstakingly go through every single possible risk and benefit an inmate might receive

by participating in my research. I concluded that this is a very minimal risk study with
ri$k~ including feeling sad or uncomfortable, and the chance someone knows the inmate

vy;;ts . interviewe& There are no direct benefits, although the inmate may feel happy

4.~f~~ing th~se issues or benefit from introspection. Another benefit for the inmate is
J'.Qi~JAv n~ hylped me as the researcher become more educated.

11

One major aspect of the Protocol Summary and wishes of the IRB was that I
wrote a consent form that was perfect (Appendix B). lt had to be in language the inmates
could understand. It included everything mentioned in the fifteen page, "Voluntary
Informed Consent" (Appendix I). I did not want to make the form too long, because that
would greatly deter people from wanting to sign or even to read it. I also made sure that I
read the consent form out loud to each of the inmates. We each signed two copies of the
consent form and we each kept a copy.
After two months of working on the Protocol Summary and consent form, which
was constantly being edited and reworked, I finally submitted my IRB packet to Mr. Inez
(Appendices A-F and my bibliography). Initially, he r~,iected my proposal. DW Simon
had originally planned for me to interview minimum security inmates living in trailers
attached to the jail. I would have interviewed them in their common area. Mr. Inez was
concerned that officers would overhear the interviews and use the information inmates
were telling me against the inmate. I also specifically had to tell each inmate absolutely
not to tell me any infonnation about why he was in jail, about any pending trials, or any
other information that could possibly get the inmate in trouble. I agreed to this, and DW
Simon arranged for me to interview inmates in the main area of the jail, in the sound
proof rooms reserved for attorney/inmate conferences. It was then that Mr. Inez finally
gave me approval (Appendix K).
During our first meeting, Deputy Warden Simon, who is a tan, muscular man with
huge hands and a thick brown mustache, gave me a brief background of the jail. Simon
told me, which I had already read, that the Camden County Correctional Facility is
extremely over crowded. On the day that I was speaking with DW Simon, there were 484
sentenced imnates and 1691 inmates pending sentencing. Officially, the jail can hold
1257 inmates, as there are 1257 beds.
This number of beds includes the four" mod" trailers that were attached to the
side of the jail to allow for extra space. These trailers house minimum security inmates.
·DW Simon continued to look through his computer for statistics and told me that the

,tregular housing block A should have no more than 120 inmates. The day of our
•;, :iftternew, it had 181 inmates .
.";·::-=:-

12

....

DW Simon also explained to me the way inmates are classified. If,
makes it past "'admissions", the inmate is assigned a certain color unifor
"population" - where all the other inmates are housed. When a person is l'h...._
or she is brought to admissions. Regardless of the crime, all prisoners are keptto1;,,,__
a single cell. There may be up to six people in these small cells. The recently arrest~;i"'- -. _
people must stay in these cells for 23 hours, 40 minutes per day, and are not allowed to
shower. Often, if a person makes bail and is able to pay his or her way out of jail, he or
she never makes it to population. A person may be in admissions for up to seven days.
During the time a person is in admissions, he or she is seen by a physician, a
:I

mental health therapist and an officer assigned to "class unit". This officer takes the
professionals' opinions, as well as the past criminal history, past incarceration, if the
inmate was ever previously in the Camden jail, and how he or she behaved as well as the
severity of the charge, and the amount bail was set to. Then the class unit officer assigns
an imnate a number on a 1-10 point scale. An inmate given a rank of 1-3 is considered
minimum. Inmates with points 4-6 are given medium status. Inmates who are assigned a
7 or higher are considered maximum security inmates.
All women are given beige uniforms regardless of the points they receive during
admission. On the date I was speaking with DW Simon, there were 116 women in the
jail. All of these women were residing in the North block.
Inmates who are assigned to live in the trailers, or the «mods" are given yellow
uniforms. They are not allowed to be in the main jail and other inmates are not allowed to
be in the trailers. I was told by some of the inmates that the ''mods" are extra minimum
security, although the Deputy Warden did not indicate this. Minimum security inmates
who are assigned to live in the regular jail are given orange uniforms. Blue uniforms are
for medium security inmates and red uniforms are reserved for maximum security
inmates. DW Simon assured me that the point scale is important. 'You have to look at
past charges. You can have a shoplifter trying to beat everyone up and a real pain in the
ass, or you can have a murderer who is a lamb'. Later I found out that "dark blue"
uniforms are for inmates in the mentally ill block, and tan smocks are given to inmates
who work in the kitchen. To me the jail seemed made up of mostly orange and red
inmates.

13

~'""""'"
--

-~----

- ---

-

-

-

-

-

-----

DW Simon continued to tell me about life in the jail. Lunch starts at I 0:00AM.
Inmates used to be able to 'walk around', and eat in a cafeteria. Having all the imnates
come out of their cells to eat, especially with over crowding, caused too many problems
so now inmate's food is brought directly to the cells on trays by kitchen staff.
Apparently, the Camden County Correctional Facility fails its annual Federal
Review every year. The jail receives an automatic failure because the Camden jail does
not allow contact visits, which is a requirement of Federal law. However, with over
crowding, DW Simon told me, '[contact visits) are more trouble than it's worth'. DW
Simon said, 'we fail every year and we don't care. We're not state, just county'. Since the
Camden jail is a county jail rather than a state jail, it is privately funded rather than paid
for by the state. Therefore, even though the jail fails its reviews, it does not have to worry
about losing funding. For visits, inmates talk through a phone and may look at their
visitor through glass. Apparently there were a lot of problems ranging from people trying
to have sex, sneaking contraband into the jail, to fights breaking out between visitors and
inmates.
The next week, I went back to the Camden Jail. I couldn't start my interviews yet
because I didn't have IRB approval, but I was anxious to get a sense of the jail. Deputy
Warden Simon had a female officer, Officer Juarez, give me a full tour of the jail. Officer
Juarez was a petit Hispanic woman, probably only 25 or 30 years old. She seemed
friendly to all the imnates, and would wave and joke with them as we went by. She had a
terrible time remembering my name and why I was at the jail, but she was more than
happy to tell me all the gossip.
We started in the Mods. 'These are mostly parole violations, child support cases,
or they are waiting to go to prison. There are not many problems here' she told me.
Officer Juarez also had her own explanation of the way the imnates were color classified.
'Red are the murders', she told me. 'Their bail is set at $50,000 or more. The mins are
yellow and orange, and their bail is set at $20-30,000'.
Officer Juarez told me that most of the problems occur in admissions. This area
was not part of the tour because 'it smells!' Officer Juarez reiterated what DW Simon had

told me about imnates having to stay unseparated for up to 7 days while being processed
Jntothejail. 'When they come out, they are smiling', Juarez said. 'Jail doesn't change

14

,,
"••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
•..•
••
••

people; it's not a deterrent. When they get out of there [admissions] they get to go live
with their friends and family. Once they get out of admissions they're not scared. Maybe
jail would be a deterrent if they only stayed in admissions.'
Officer Juarez continued to tell me about the inner workings of the jail.
'Shipments are a little crazy', she said. "Shipments" occur on Fridays, and are when the
jail receives buses full of new inmates. Some of the inmates in the shipment are simply
traveling through Camden on their way to another city. They may spend the night, or
more likely a few days in the jail. Other inmates are being transferred to Camden because
they have committed crimes in Camden County, or because another New Jersey state
operated jail does not have space. Even though the Camden jail is significantly
overcrowded, it is still contracted to take about 250 state inmates, because the state jail is
even more overcrowded .
Code orange is the code called when two inmates are fighting. It is given this
color code because in the recent past, all the inmates wore orange. A code brown is called
when an officer is hurt. According to Officer Juarez, at any given time, there are about
250 - 280 officers on duty in the jail.
The jail is set up so that the first floor is divided into offices and central video
surveillance. There are two elevators, one for officers and one for imnates. The officers'
elevator opens like a nonnal elevator but has no buttons. When an officer enters, he holds
up the number floor he wants with his fingers. It is someone's job to watch the camera in
the comer of the elevator to see what floor he should allow the elevator to go to. The jail
has two wings called "North" and "South". In each wing there are three pods, labeled A,
B and C. These pods hold multiple cells, which is also called a "cell block". All of the
cells in a certain pod will hold the same color uniformed inmates, but different pods in
one wing can hold different colored uniformed inmates. Within these pods, or blocks,
inmates are allowed to wonder from cell to cell. However, if a certain inmate is
misbehaving, his entire cell is put under lockdown. These means every person assigned to
that cell is also kept under lock down.
The second floor houses the mentally ill unit, as well as the women. The hospital
is also located on the second floor. The third and fourth floors are connected by a
stairway right through the middle. Technically at the top of the stairs is the 4th floor. This

15

I

is one area for visitors. The center of the third floor houses a room for video court. One
third floor inmate, George, told me that 'guys on the fifth floor are suppose to be more

,

,'
►

•t

•tt

•
-•t

••

tougher but to me it's all the same'. Officer Juarez never said anything about the different
levels housing different security of inmates. Under the stairs are individual soundproof
rooms where inmates have meetings with their lawyers. This is where I conducted some
of my interviews.
The rest of my interviews were conducted on the fifth floor. The fifth and sixth
floors were arranged in the same way as the third and fourth floors. The sixth floor was
also for visitors. Inmates are not supposed to change floors unless they have a valid
reason to do so, such as they are delivering food trays. Inmates who live on the third floor
must have their visits on the connecting fourth floor, and inmates who live on the fifth
floor must have their visit5 on the sixth floor. The pods at each of the wings go up two
stories to fill the space of the combination third and fourth stories, as well as the
combination fifth and sixth stories. However, when inmates say where they are housed, I
never heard any one talk about the "fourth floor" or "'sixth floor" .
The seventh floor was simply the roof It had an outdoor basketball court. There
was also an indoor area that had a weight room. Inmates go up to this recreational area
with their entire block, the way an entire elementary school grade might have recess at
the same time, even though there are different classes. Inmates are given one hour per
day to spend on the seventh floor.

PART III - INTERVIEWS

It was December before I finally started interviewing inmates. My first interyiew
was with Eddie Torres. On the day I arrived to begin my interviews, there was some
miscommunication regarding who I was going to interview and where these interviews
were going to be conducted. I waited in the Sergeant's office with Officer Caudley while
1t::~:c;,,ther correctional officer went to straighten things out and "find" the inmate the
had arranged for me to interview. I thought the word "find" was interesting
-• ·ll,a~sumed the officers would know the exact position of every inmate in the jail

<_moment. Apparently, the officers do not.

16

....

Since I was not allowed to bring a tape recording device into the jail, I took
rigorous notes. Many of my notes say something like, "First time spent night in jail - 17
years old". This means I asked the question, "when was the first time you spent the night
in jail?", to which the response was something very close to, "when I was 17 years old".
Therefore, when I transcribed my notes, I added in the extra words such as "when I was"
to make the text more readable. The interviews are not direct quotes, but I paid close
attention to the way the inmates spoke, and the choice of words such as "we do this'' or
"they do this" to capture the meaning and feeling of the interviews.
During my interviews, I focused on the knowledge the inmate (or officer)
possessed as well as his attitude and behavior. 1 paid special attention to the interaction of
all three of these concepts. _
I printed out a list of questions that I planned to ask each inmate. (Appendix C). I
usually started off by asking the inmate where he was from. I asked about brothers,
sisters and any children. To break the ice a little bit, I would ask follow up questions
about the inmate's children, if it were applicable. I asked how old the kids were, what
grade they were in, what did they enjoy, if they played sports. Talking about their kids
seemed to make the inmates relax and be more comfortable talking to me.
Officer Caudley was probably in his thirties, and had a thick, stalky build. He was
more fat than muscle but he had wide shoulders and an imposing manner. He had sandy
brown hair and a thick Philadelphia accent. He announced he could already tell me
everything the inmates were going to say, and urged me to practice with him. A
paraphrasing of our mock interview is as follows: (I asked the questions to Officer
Caudley directly, as ifhe was the inmate himself, but his responses were often" 'they' do
this" and" 'they' do that".

Alison: Where are you from?
Officer Caudley: Camden. Most are from Camden.
Alison: Is this your first time in jail?
:?fficer Caudley: No this is not my first time. They might say it's their first time but it's

\:;~gt They probably got arrested as juveniles and got away.
When was the :ljrst time you were in jail?

17

....

Officer Caudley: They will say they were arrested between 18-20 years for the first time.
They have come back ever since.

Officer Caudley then began discussing his feelings about the inmates, so I let him keep
talking without asking questions. He proceeded to tell me that:

I'

t

t
~

•

••
I

•

t

•·

In jail is wht."fe the inmates make friends, are educated- but educated
"strictly on crime"-they learn about drugs and how to steal cars. The
people here are raised within the facility. Very few people here are in here
for the first time. If a person has a successful life, they will have never
been here and come here for the first time at age 30. But most of the
inmates here have been incarcerated here their whole life, this is home .
People have their best friends here, their cousins. People don't know how
to act.

Officer Caudley then asked me, 'are you familiar with the demographics here? I might

~

get in trouble, but here', and printed out the demographics of the Camden County

I

earlier. The printout showed the ethnic breakdown of the Camden jail, as well as the

•
••
••
=
••,.
•••

It

It
It

••

ii

•

Correctional Facility. It seemed to be the same information DW Simon was reading to me

number of inmates in other county jails through out New Jersey (Appendix L).
Caudley continued to tell me that, 'Camden is the 4 th largest county jail
population wise. (Jan 9, 2005) There are exactly 1959 inmates here today (Jan 9, 2005).
There are two North Jersey jails with populations around 2000 but for South Jersey this is
by far the largestjaiL' Officer Caudleybegan reading statistics offhis computer. He
infonned tne that:

140 of these inmates haven't seen a judge. On Mondays we do bail
reduction. Fridays are for sentencing. The inmates are in trial Monday
through Friday. There are 2178 inmates accounted for right now, but that
includes work programs. Three inmates are under 18. Out of the 2178,
600, well, 608 inmates have been incarcerated before. If they only do

18

admissions they never come back. If they make it to population there are
certain things they get used to. When these inmates go home they don't
have washing machines so they wash their clothes in the shower [just like
they do here].'

Caudley continued:

Around the holidays, there are always fights. There are more suicides.
We've found a few. In ten years we've had 5 or 6 successful suicides. Last
year someone killed a mental health inmate. That area has always been
crowded. The guy who was killed, they told me he was real annoying.
He'd like, sing and be real loud. His roommate killed him with his bare
hands. In another county they'd call it positional asphyxiation and it would
be out of the papers in two days. Here ... (sighs).

''

I asked Caudley what he meant, and he said the death was all over the media.
Alison: Why was it in the media for so long?
Caudley: Because it doesn't happen here. The staff is very professional. We keep things
calm. There's not much to dwell on so they [the media] dwell on that. We're the third
largest county facility, probably the largest single facility.

I looh;d the prisoner's death up online. According to the Mental Health Association of
New Jersey's website, Joel Seidel was a 65 year old man with a mental illness. He was
beaten to death in his cell by two of his cell mates on January 2ih, 2004. Seidel had
chosen to stay in jail rather than paying the $150 bail. The article stated the jail was
severely overcrowded. The article also blamed the "guards" (a word I was instructed was
very insulting to the "officers") for not checking on Seidel every fifteen minutes.

Officer Caudley started talking to me again about my interviews.

19

t
t

•►-

Remember, he told me, if anyone bothers you, or says or does anything
you don't like- even if it's just looking at you funny, you tell us and we

•

will get him out of there. Period. You're a pretty blond girl and I don't

~

want anything to happen to you. Seriously, if they say anything that makes

t

••
••

you uncomfortable let us know. Plus, if DW Simon likes you, which
apparently he does, you can do anything. And if anything happens to you,
it will be my ass. I mean, we 're not going to give you any guys that are well, your first interviewee - Eddie, he's a good guy. I mean, he's not
because he's a criminal, but he's a good guy. He's been in here a few

••t

times, but he's had a rough time. He's in some shit, excuse my language,

•t

that just seems .. .I dunno. I believe him; I think it was an accident. What

I

.happened was there was a shooting, probably over drugs or something
stupid and a 12 year old boy got shot and killed. Eddie's a good guy

ll

though. I believe him.'

I

•

't

=
I

••
-

Just as Officer Caudley finished telling me about Eddie, Eddie arrived for the interview.
Eddie was tall - probably 6' l ", had jet black hair and pale skin. He had huge forearms
like he lifted weights but he had flab hanging off his biceps. His head was shaved, and it
appeared his anns were shaved also. He came across as tough, but not intimidating. He
was very polite and interested in what I was doing, in a completely asexual way. I never
felt as ifhe was bitting on me, or looking at me in any sexual way. Before I started asking
questions, I told Eddie, as I told all the inmates, I don't want to know anything about your
- case. I don't want to get you in trouble and I don't want you to tell me anything that
could possibly get you in trouble. I had Eddie sign the consent form. Then I started my
interview by asking where he was from and his age. He was from Camden, NJ~ and was
29 years old. My next question was, "what is the purpose of jail"? Eddie answered:

::·.?ieiJail? Jail is a place to pay for your mistakes. It's punishment. I guess it's to get on
· - ,.ht:-ttack for what you've done.

·>

;rwas the fi~st time you got in trouble?

20

.,..

Eddie: Arrested or locked up?
Alison: Both
Eddie: This is the first time I've ever been arrested or locked up. I've known people here.
Half the people I grew up with are in jail. This was never a place I wanted to go. The
lucky ones never went to jail. Now I know exactly what they went through. The pain, the
pain for their family. It's especially hard during the holidays.
Alison: When was the first time you got in trouble with the law thoughEddie: I was 15 years old. I was scared. I hoped my parents were going to look at me
again once I got out. As far as up bringing, I had it good. I went to a private school- St.
John's.
Alison: Where is that?
Eddie: Camden County New Jersey.
Alison: Do you have any brothers or sisters? Are you married? Do you have any kids'?
What is your family like?
Eddie: I have three brothers. I am the youngest. My oldest brother, I was 18 when he first
got in trouble.
Alison: What did your parents say?
Eddie: I wasn't living with my parents at the time. I was 16 when I moved out-I was
still in high school. My parents didn't want me to leave. There was a person I was
involved with. She was in college. My father had nothing to say but you know how
mothers are. They don't want their babies to leave. (laughs) My oldest brother, he was 23
or 24 when he first got in trouble - he's eight years older than me. My mom was shocked.
She never suspected what he was doing. She never suspected he would go to jail for what
he did. It was real bad. It was real hard on her. It was broadcasted all over the news and
stuff. She was hurt. She tried to keep us away from certain areas.
Alison: (Pause)
Eddie: Years ago in Camden you could leave your car unlocked. You could sleep with
the -windows open without anyone taking anything. Camden is not what it used to be. It's
a total change. It's like a dream, from what is was to what it is now. It's like a ghost town
now. People barely walk the streets past 9 o'clock. There are no activities for children
because parents are scared.

21 ·

Alison: Why do you think Camden is lik~ that?
Eddie: There isn't enough money in the budget. People in the community don't want to
give money because they are scared. People want out but not everybody is fortunate
enough to pick up and leave. Like Halloween? There wt.-re barely any children trick or
treating past 6:30. I mean, I was in here but l phoned a couple people, I keep in touch. I
know things faster in here than people on the outside do!

Alison: So tell me about the first time you got in trouble:
Eddie: It was an easy process. There was.this kid at school, I was in front of him, I was
accompanying him. It got back to the principle that we had marijuana so they notified our
parents. My parents - they were shocked. Here I was 15 or 16 years old at a private
school with marijuana on me. I was released from the police station; he [the other kid]
got the one year rule. You can't get in trouble in one year or you will receive probation.
Eddie: You know, this is the worst county. There are four people in one room that is only
supposed to hold two individuals. There's someone sleeping near the toilet, you have to
wake him up to use the bathroom. To get him to move over, you know? You could make
a movie about some of the stuff that happens here.

Alison: Wait, tell me more about the first time you were in trouble. What did the kids at
your school think?
Eddie: A lot of kids went up to me to shake my hand. It made you look better, you know?
A total image ... like it was cool or whateyer.
Alison: What about the first time you had to spend the night in jail?
Eddie: The first time here [in jail] I knew I was going to spend a lot of nights here. I just
take it one day at a time. I'm strong minded. It's a waiting process. The bails are
outrageous. For example, somebody locked up for stealing out of a store - shoplifting years ago bail was $1500-2000. Now it's no less than $10,000.

:Alison: How does the bail process work?

r J:m~•ie: Cash bail is 10% of the bail. You don't get that 10% back. So lets say you have a
;()(),O_bail, the bail bondsman has security, he takes the $100,000 and you make

'·,wts on that $100,900. You're reimbursed when you show up to court.
22

'TI

Alison: What happens if you don't show up?
Eddie: Then they send a bounty hunter after you. There are two types of bounty hunters-

I,

'·

one that works for the state, you know, when you are running from the state, and the
other works for a bail bondsman because you violated their rules.

Alison: So what kind of work do you do when you are not in jail?
Eddie: I'm a heavy equipment operator. I still stay in touch with my boss. We're good
friends.
Alison: Does he care that you're in here?
Eddie: Nah, not at all.

Eddie: I've been here 15 months, since November 2nd of 2004. On my block there aren't
too many new faces. A lot of people who·come in here you can like, feel the tension. It's
not the town- it's the crime rate. There are just so many things. There is a negative vibe.
In my block there are fights every day. People do what they want in the room. The
officers aren't going to say anything.

Eddie: We gossip more than women. Yoµ know everything outside before someone tells
you on the phone. You know, you '11 call someone and they will say, my ex girl was
messing with so and so, but you already knew about it. l constantly seen people I went to
school with.

Eddie: There are cycles. One guy said you get locked up one time you '11 be back. I know
guys my age who've been eight or nine times going to state prison and are back.
Eddie: Since this county Li ail] has been built, there have never been any real riots. It's
always been inmate against inmate. Sometimes an officer gets punched. If that happens
you are going to get locked up, and get a little treat too.
Alison: What do you mean treat?
Eddie: (laughs) you know ... treat. .. they're going to rough you up a little bit.

23

I

I'

. I

J
I

Eddie: Lock up is when you do something wrong. Sanctions means you are locked up 23
hours per day, with no visits. I have a friend locked up in Two South. He's real crazy- he
urinated in a cup and told someone it was tea.

Eddie: You know there is no contact here. [Contact visits for the inmates]. Vv e had a vote
to either have cable or contact visits, and those idiots chose cable.
Alison: When was this?
Eddie: When the jail first opened.

This is interesting because DW Simon specifically told me that the administration at the
Camden Jail chose to stop the contact visits because contact visits caused too many
problems. Since many of the officers are close to the inmates I would have expected if
the officers knew the truth that the inmates would know the truth. A possible follow up
question to an officer is "why are there n? contact visits at the Camden jail?"
Eddie's response is also interesting because even though he claims not to have
been incarcerated during this time, he still says "we" to refer to the people who had a
vote. Either he is lying about when he was incarcerated or he includes himself in this
"inmate" group. However, since in his next sentence Eddie refers to inmates as "those
idiots", I believe Eddie may have been in the Camden County Jail at the time of the
"vote". Therefore, when Eddie says ''we", he literally means himself rather than saying
"we" for any Camden inmate population.
When I asked Eddie ifhe was or ever had been in a gang, he replied no, he was
not in a gang. But yes, he is a Latin King. Latin Kings are a large Latino gang, most well
known on the West Coast. Their gang colors are gold and black. I asked him again, so
you were a Latin King? To which he responded, "no I am a Latin King. But I don't
consider my self a gang member".

Alison: Do people know you are a Latin King?

. :L...)~ddi~:. People aren't supposed to know. Certain officers know. They bring me a name,
·::~ijl,teJlJhem no that's not one of my guys. [If a certain inmate is causing problems].

.J~~~: What if it is one of your guys?
24

r
I

Eddie: They [the officers] let me meet him. They let me out of here. I overview the
situation. If they [the inmate] did something wrong, I give out sanctions. If you send an
order it has to be done. I have the same position on the street I'm a First Crown. There
are four crowns in our family. I'm in charge of inside the jail; there is another Crown in
charge of the street. "Our nation- I don't run it under the West Coast guidelines".

Eddie and I continued talking, for almost two hours. When lunch was being served for
the inmates, Officer Caudley came in again. He told us we needed to finish up, so Eddie
could have a chance to eat lunch. All food is served in the inmates' cells. Eddie turned to
me and said, 'I like Officer Caudley. He doesn't look at us like we're animals - like we
are bad people'.

After Eddie left, Officer Caudley started talk to me again. 'You know what causes
problems?' he asked me. 'Lower officers. They want authority. They act like real asses to
the inmates and it just causes problems. I just treat people, you know, if it was my
brother, how would I want them to be treated.' Officer Caudley continued to tell me his
theories regarding the jail system.

Officer Caudley: You know, 90% of all major incidences are from food or food issues.
Look it up - seriously, go online and look it up. It will say. Food is a major cause of
problems in jails. It's because in jail, all you have to look forward to is eating ... I feel
like a social worker here. You get a feel for the guys who don't belong here. Then you
.. get the guys who enjoy it here. They are just a product of their environment.

The next week I interviewed two orange level-of-security inmates - Ricardo and Troy.
Ricardo was born in Puerto Rico, and moved to Western Flats, NJ when he was 1O or 11.
He lived in Western Flats, a small South Jersey town for one year, and Pittsburg for one

, .: Lyear before permanently moving to Camden in ih or 8th grade. Today, Ricardo is 43
'<'\t~.~snld. He is a slight man with thinning hair and a faded tattoo on his forearm. He
::;,~eyery quietly with a Spanish accent. He seemed nervous to be talking to me. When

25

....

.. . ·:_;::..,

t

•

•

J

he did start talking more openly, he mostly wanted to talk about his troubled childhood

•

and his mother who he felt didn't care for him .

••

••'
••'

••
•:••
,.
,.•
II
ii

!~

Ip

Alison: What was the first time you ever got in trouble?
Ricardo: It was in Camden. I was joyriding in a car .
Alison: What happened?
Ricardo: Well, I got caught inside a stolen vehicle. I didn't steal it. Some other person
stole it. I was just in it .
Alison: What did your parents do?
Ricardo: They came and got me from the juvenile detention facility .
Alison: When was the first time you ever went to jail?
Ricardo: I was about 14.
Alison: How did it make you feel?
Ricardo: It's hard to say. I was afraid my mom was going to find out.
Alison:·Did she?
Ricardo: Yes
Alison: How?
Ricardo: She had to pick me up. They released me to her.
Alison: [silence]
Ricardo: And that was it.
Alison: What was her reaction?
Ricardo: Nothing really happened. She just scolded me.
Alison: Did anybody else find out?
Ricardo: It didn't happen in my neighborhood so my neighborhood didn't know what
happened. Like closed doors.
Alison: How many times have you been in jail?
., R.ic~rdo:·Oooh, about fifteen times ...
;c-~!lson: When was the first time you spent the night in jail?
:,90;'.lwas .19. It was in 1981.

,c: fWhat did your mom say then?

26

I
I

Ricardo: She was more upset. .. Well not really. I'm just finding out, when l was growing

I

up she was drinking a lot. I was not surprised. She worked. I had no communication with

,

her at a very early age. I'd go to the YMCA after school to exercise. By 7 :00, she'd

-

Alison: How does it make you feel?

~

•

•

already be sleeping. I've never thought about my life history.

Ricardo: Good. l have a lot ofissues I need to work through. I wish I could talk to people,

•

but they [the inmates] look down on you here if you try to talk about your problems.

•

Troy is from Woodside, NJ, a slightly more affluent town no more than a 45 minute drive

•-•

t

••
•

•t'
••
••
t

I

•I

from Camden. He is 31 years old and had been arrested 31 times. He is a whi~e man with
sandy brown hair and stubbly facial hair. He had two visible tattoos, one on each bicep.
The tattoos were partially covered by the sleeves of his orange jumpsuit. When Troy
came in, I was crossing out the word "guard" and replacing it with "officer" on the
consent form because Officer Caudley had told me that 'guards are for malls not jails' .
When Troy realized why I was changing the wording he said, 'these are guards. All they
do is babysit us.' However, later in the interview I realized Troy was close friends with
many of the officers.

Alison: Do you have a job outside of jail?
Troy: I work with concrete.
Alison: What exactly do you do?
Troy: Work with different types of chemicals- like calcium. I love doing it. It's hard, it's

It

fun, it keeps you in shape. I've been doing it for nine years.

ti

Troy: I'm better than everyone else, I shouldn't be here.

''
t

It

11.

I
■<

Troy: All the cops think; - there are eight cops [jail officers] here who I played [township]
hockey with. In Cascade Hills. Tuey called me out here, they said, go brush your teeth,
she's [Alison] pretty. Tuey don't give m~ an extra [food] tray though. 1bat's a big deal.
So I don't ask either. On the streets they'd do anything for me. In here they make it hard
for me, so I won't come back. There are five officers who all live on my same block [at

27

..

home]. The female officers here are terrible. One just got fired because she got caught
with eight ounces of coke. In here, a $10 bag of drugs costs $100.

Troy started talking about how he's had enough of jail. Troy said he's sick of the other
inmates and the food. He turned to me and said, "Enough of this bullshit Alison. I want to
go home. I'm a soldier but I'm tired of m_arching". I think ifs interesting that Troy uses
the metaphor of a soldier. A soldier conjures up images of toughness and bravery.
Foucault describes that becoming a soldier teaches men to stand with their heads erect
and their eyes not on the ground. When someone teaches a man to be a solider, "one has
gotten rid of the peasant and given him the air of a soldier" (Foucault, 135).

An officer came by, grinning, and gave Troy the middle finger. Both men laughed.
Troy: See this guy? This guy with the glasses? My cousin does demolition work. He just
knocked down [the officer's] house.
Troy gave the officer the middle finger back.

Although I did not specifically ask my first three interviewees why they had been
picked, I can make an educated guess. I imagine Eddie was picked because at least
Officer Caudley and whoever the other officer was who "found'' Eddie thought Eddie
was a good guy who would talk to me and not give me any problems. Since Ricardo
mentioned that no one will listen to him, and that he has no one to talk to about his
problems, I imagine Ricardo has tried to talk about his "problems" fo someone. Perhaps
the officers picked up on this and thought he would be willing to talk to me. Last, I think
it is highly likely that the officers in the jail picked Troy to talk to me because a number
.

of the officers are close personal friends with Troy. Talking to me would give Troy a
chance to get out of his cell and give him something to do.
The next week in my interviews I started asking the inmates why they thought the
officers had picked them to talk to me. My first interviewee was Isaiah. He was clad in an
orange unifonn. He had a tall, thin but muscular frame, with hot chocolate colored skin
and an attractive face. He told me he was· 31 years old, but he looked younger. Isaiah had
~ery kind eyes and I was immediately relaxed and comfortable around him.

28

.,.

Alison: Why do you think the officers picked you to come talk to me?
Isaiah: I don't know ... I'm in and out of here. I'm not a bad guy- I mean, I get along
with the officers. Not no cop shit- excuse my language [meaning Isaiah gets along with
the jail officers but does not consider himself a friend of police officers]. I don't know ...
I'm not funky ...
Alison: Where are you from?
Isaiah: From Camden. Around the comer.

Isaiah: Did you hear about Camden in Colorado? This city is like Iraq. It's devastating.
North Camden looks real bad. The government doesn't care about it. The mayor doesn't
care. Everybody knows how bad it is though. Every comer is a_drug comer. All the old
houses and abandoned buildings .. .I played hike and seek in all them when I was little.
This is a very violent city. You get killed for nothing. Life has no value here. Nobody has
got any morals. I mean, there never have ~een morals here but it's gotten worse. Young
guys kill for making money. This city sucks. Growing up here made life bad. I've been to
prison four times. I was always smart in school too, I dropped out in 10th grade but I got
my GED.

By comparing Camden to Iraq, Isaiah is creating another soldier metaphor. If both
Camden and Iraq are war zones, then the people living there must fight. They must fight
like soldiers fight - for their lives.
Isaiah went on to tell me his first time he was arrested was for marijuana
possession. His mom was shocked. Isaiah's brother was "caught" with a homicide when
Isaiah was 16 or 17; His brother was only 18.

Isaiah: I know a lot of people here. When I got locked up [recently] there were 15 or 20
people with us. Everybody was selling drugs. [Now they are all in the Camden Jail
'together];
-'Alischt:Do-you ever see people outside of jail who you know from inside jail?

29

Isaiah: Yah, I see the officers all the time: I see [the officers] ride by, or at a concert or I
might see them at shows. I might see them all the mall - the Strawberry Hill mall, outside
Camden.
Alison: What is that like--seeing them?
Isaiah: I know all the officers so we're friendly. They are much more friendly [outside the
jail]. I'm pretty much cool with them. There's a big change. They are definitely nicer.

••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
•

••
••
••
••
•

Alison: Are they nice to you in jail?
Isaiah: Yah I mean, we're cool.

The next imnate I interviewed was George. He is a 42 year old Afucan American man
born in Camden. His whole family is still currently living in Camden. George was rather
thick and stout, but more doughey than muscle. He was in an orange unifonn. Before I
had the chance to ask any questions, George began spouting out how horrible jail is and
how badly he is treated .

George: Of course my mother was upset I was in jail. Jail is horrible. That was a stupid
question. Ask something else .

The first time George had gotten in trouble was when he was 17. He had broken into "an
old lady's house", which happened to be his neighbor. The neighbor recognized him and
called the police.
Unlike the other imnates I interviewed, I didn't think George was being
particularly truthful with me. I thought George was telling me what he thought I should
hear - that jail is terrible and he doesn't deserve to be here, rather than the actual
emotional reaction his fuends and family have to him being in jail. However, he did seem
to be a bit more honest about his employer.

Alison: Does your boss care if you are in jail?
George: Huh! Of course! ... But he wouldn't fire me .
Alison: Why?

I
I

•

9 :Jrt:f:;,:• •

30

.x

George: All the guys who work there [in the shipyards] have been incarcerated at one
time or another.
Alison: How do you know?
George: Because I do. I've been there long enough to know.

Alison: Why were you picked to come talk to me?
George: Everybody likes me.
Alison: Do you know any of the officers?
George: Like be friends with the guards? How can you be friends with the guards? You
can't be friends. If you're friends with the guards then you [are] [the] police. Having that
type oflabel is no good when you're injail because then they [other inmates] will kill
you.
Alison: What happens if you see an officer outside of jail?
George: Nothing. We both might wave. Say hi maybe. But if who [I'm] with says, who's
that, then I make sure they know it ain't nothing like that [that George and the jail officer
are friends].

George was the only inmate out of nine who I interviewed who used the pronoun "we" to
refer to himself and other inmates. He used "we" extensively. The other people I
interviewed either used the words "you" (you act this way in jail) or "I''. Occasionally,
the other inmates would say "they" to refer to other prisoners' actions .
.

George: We're smarter than them [officers] because we are animals. We're smarter than
they think we are. They think we're stupid. Jail is not good at all for us. This is terrible.
This place is not for human beings. We keep people jobs. [The inmates allow the officers
to have jobs in the jail].
George: We know what's going on. We "ear hustle". We hear the police talking, we hear

it and they don't. We listening. That's how rumors spread.

,f;j:f Perhaps most striking is when George includes the mentally ill inmate population in his

31

....

···."·.···.-···········•,:.a_. __

George: Some ofus are not all that okay. Two South A? [Mentally ill block]. Any ofus
up here can end up there. You end up like Fred Flintstone in a padded suit.

George also makes a reference to a soldier.
George: "We in jail now, we become warriors"
George made this statement after I asked him why all the inmates I interviewed or even
the inmates l pass in the hallways constantly ask me for my pens. George said the jail
issued pens don't work because they are cheap.

At one point in our interview, George started laughing and pointed to another man, sitting
down in the adjacent conference room. The man laughed and waved back. They made
some type of sign to one another that I could not understand. It turned out that the man
George was talking to was his little brother. I specifically asked if it was a blood relative
rather than a friend George was calling his "brother", which made George upset. George
assured me it was his real brother.

When I returned to Camden one week later, my first interview was with Ruben.
Ruben is 35 years old black man born in North Philly. He came to Camden in 1992.
Ruben told me people call him "KC" because he lived on Kansas City Ave, a major
avenue in North Philadelphia. I heard both officers and other inmates calling Ruben
"KC". Of his five children, only one cunently lives in Philadelphia. The rest live in
Camden. Ruben had massive hands that reminded me of a heavy weight boxer. His body
shape also reminded me of a heavy weight boxer. He wore a red jail uniform. Ruben is
som~one who could easily be very intimidating, but I did not feel threaten by him at all.
He had huge dimples in his cheeks and a charming laugh. He was extremely friendly,
courteous and respectful.
Ruben explained to me that his father was a truck driver and his mother was an
. . . alcoholic. Therefore, Ruben '"did what it took to survive". He first got in trouble at 11 or
12 for stealing items out of stores - "little kid things".

32

..., ··,,-,,-~~-:-------- ... -.

...

-_

- ··-·-·· .. -· ....

_

. ,-·-·

------

- ___,_ ----. ---

Alison: What did your mom say when she came to get you? [When Ruben was first
arrested and in jail]
Ruben: Nah, she just beat me.
Alison: Did your dad say anything?
Ruben: Nah, he just beat me too

Ruben told me he was scared when he first went to prison, but jail is "a mess-like kitty
cat. It's just a whole bunch of babies".

Ruben: On my block I maintain control.
Alison: How?
Ruben: People respect me. IfI make a call they gonna respect it. I'm not super bad, super
tough guy but ... I'm not gonna allow you to get me on lock down and stop my visits.
You act crazy, my stuff gets shut down. Plus I can fight. And people know it. I get it in
and they respect me.
Ruben: Automatically someone comes on [on the block], they [the other inmates] tell
them [the new inmate] they [everyone] call me KC. They [other inmates] say, he [Ruben]
ain't that dude to be messing with.

Alison: Have you ever seen guards on the street? [Outside the jail walls]
Ruben: Y aa (smiles) ... see on the street. .. [In jail] I was in a situation, and the guards just
have a job to do. So the guards are like, what up man, buy you a drink or something.
People got family members here. It's cool though. A couple officers, I did work for them
in their houses. It's not a hate relationship. They [the officers] just not gonna jeopardize
they job for you. Like give you cigarettes or something.
Alison: Do you have a job when you are not in jail?
Ruben: I do construction, like home remodeling. I work with sheet rock. I like tearing the
whole house apart and rebuilding it. Guards here now, that own property, they say, 'Yo
man, I'll be glad when you get out, I have work for you' ... Oh, I left my coffee [in the
sergeant's office], can I go get it?

33

This is interesting, because none of the inmates are allowed in the sergeant's
office. Someone who is considered "red". and therefore under maximum security is not
suppose to be wandering around, and especially not suppose to be in the sergeant's office.
When Ruben came back, I asked him why he thought the officers asked him to talk to
me.

Ruben: I honestly believe it's because they know my character. I'm an overall good
person. I'm not going to sit here and ask you stupid questions.

Ruben and I continued to talk about his childhood and his children. When Ruben saw the
next inmate I was set to interview, he said:

Let me tell you about this guy. He's an intellectual dummy. He's got these
glasses, and he's only smart when he puts on the glasses. He's
extremely ... vocally gifted (laughs). He's gonna come-in here and try to
impress you. Watch, watch. He's going to come in here and say, 'well, do
to ... ' (clears his throat) the things I've been through' (laughs). You're
gonna laugh. I'm gonna come back and ask you what you think about him!

The inmate Ruben was referring to was Daniel. Ruben was actually extremely
accurate about Daniel's personality. Although I wouldn't call Daniel a "dummy", he did
seem to fake an intellectualism. Daniel did indeed come in and get out a pair of glasses.
Daniel spoke with an almost pompousness, although occasionally, Daniel would become
really interested in the story he was telling, and forget his "elevated" speech and tone.
Daniel is 29 years old African American man. He is tall and wide, rather than
overweight. He told me he belonged to the faith of Islam. He had a long beard the way
many religious Muslims do. The first time Daniel was in trouble was for not paying for
peanuts at a comer store. The rest of his i_ncarcerations were mostly drug related. Daniel
wore an orange jail unifonn. The first thing Daniel said to me was:

, 34

Daniel: The previous guy, was he a good interview? Because I am an intellectual. I have
what it takes.
Alison: (laughs) Ahight. Ok, where are you from?
Daniel: From this city.
Alison: Camden?
Daniel: Camden, yes.

Daniel has one seven year old son. In response to me asking if his son liked school,
Daniel said:

Daniel: What?! Yes, he does.
Alison: What is his favorite subject?
Daniel: Reading. I can truly say he's like his father.
Alison: Oh ya? What was your favorite s~bject in school?
Daniel: Language. I'm big on that. I speak Arabic and English. I try to speak accurately
and fluently.

Daniel was rather difficult to interview. He did not listen to my questions, or at least, he
did not attempt to answer them. Often, he would go on tangents in which he talked about
'

his theories on happiness, love and life. However, one aspect that made his interviews
easier was that Daniel would take long pauses, in which I could write down his exact
words, for a quote. For example:

Alison: Have you ever been to prison?
Daniel: Yes:
Alison: Is prison different from jail?
Daniel: Yes.
Alison: How is it different?
Daniel: "Prison- the only difference prisons have (pause) other than county facilities
(pause) I can say (pause) the movement, as far as the movement is concerned,
rehabilitating into more structured things".

35

....

Daniel: Life is something we experience with all the elements which can make you happy
and make you sad. It's how you travel with it. You must deduce these elements. I may
say, it was such a good day today, my boy came through. The next day, man, I can't
belief this guy, he didn't put a blinker on. Life is always introducing itself to us.

Unfortunately, I was not able to get Daniel to focus on my questions long enough to
answer whether or not he had ever seen guards outside the jail, or ifhe knew anyone
inside the jail before he came. Our interview time was over and Daniel had to return to
his cell before I got past my introductory questions, even though we talked between 30 45 minutes.
The next week I conducted my last two interviews. First, I interviewed Thomas. I
talked to Thomas for a while. He then had to go downstairs for a probation or parole
hearing- he was in jail for violating his parole. I then spoke to Alfonso. After Alfonso
left, Thomas came back to talk to me some more. I have the feeling Thomas did not want
to return to his cell. That day, I also saw both George and Ruben in the halls talking to
the guards. I imagine both must have special privileges to be allowed out of their ceils
and allowed to wander the halls.
Thomas was the only inmate I felt a little uncomfortable around. He was perfectly
nice to me, and respectful, but I had a funny feeling about him. He told me he was 61
years old. He'd been in prison for the last 34 years and was let out in 2003. As soon as he
told me this, the reason he made me uncomfortable made perfect sense. I have seen dogs
locked up in small cages when they are puppies. These dogs get no socialization. When
people try to adopt the dog when it is 1 or 2 years old, the dog is completely crazy
because they don't know how to act. I felt the same way about Thomas. He had spent
most of his life, and certainly the majority of his adulthood, in prison. To me, Thomas
seemed like an unsocialized puppy. He didn't quite know how to act. Thomas is a white
man, with short white hair. He spoke with a "black" accent. Later he told me his wife was
a black woman.
Thomas told me about the crimes he committed. He told me he hit a kid with a
brick when he was nine, but the first time he ever got in real trouble was when went to

36

prison for murder. Thomas told me about his unhappiness with the jail system. Prison,
according to Thomas, is hard. Inmates don't get away with disrespecting officers. In jail,
the officers don't punish the inmates.

Thomas: These cops have no control. They don't know how to interact with the inmates.
If they [the inmates] cuss out of these women [the female officers] nothing happens. In
prison they'd [the inmate] get beat down.'Here they just put in eight hours [locked up for
eight hours]. A lot of these young cops are fresh out of high school.

Without any prompting, Thomas told me:
Thomas: Camden County is like a big family. Cops (jail officers] are the people you grew
up with. They have a job to do. [Inmates}will say, 'oh, we went to high school, played
football together, so bring me some cigarettes'. They will ask for special favors. But cops
are just trying to do their job. They try to treat you as a normal human being. When you
act stupid, so do they.

Thomas then pointed out a short, round, African American woman standing in the
hallway.
Thomas: See this woman? She's my sister in law. I'm married to her sister. I don't ask
her for nothing. You have to keep it separate. She works in the mail room.
Alison: Wait, that woman right there?
Thomas: No, not the video court woman. She is one ugly woman. Her brother used to be
in my wing, he was gay as a $3 dollar bill. His name was Day-Day. What kind of name is
Day-Day?
Alison: Isn't there a special area for homosexuals?
Thomas: This was a closet fag.
Alison: Ah.
Thomas: He never spoke. He tried to ask her for things. She think she owns everything.

Thomas probably could have talked to me for hour longer, but lunch was being served
and he had to return to his cell. I think it is very interesting that both female officers in

37

the hallway during our interview had family in the Camden jail. I don't know if it is a
coincidence or the norm for officers to have family in the jail. It would be interesting to
follow up with a survey of all the officers asking them if they have family members in the
i

,)

Camden jail.
The last inmate I interviewed was Alfonso. Alfonso was in an orange jumpsuit
He is a pudgy Hispanic man with yellowy skin and dark circles under his eyes. He
answered my questioned politely, but did not give any extra information. He did not seem
to want to stay and chat with me. Alfonso is 33 years old with nine children total. Five
children he raised are his own and four he raised as his own, but have a different father.
Alfonso is recently divorced. He seemed most eager to talk about his failed marriage and
separation from his wife. As soon as he gets out of jail he plans to find a nice woman to
settle down with.

Alison: Do you ever see officers from thtdail out on the street?
Alfonso: Y aa. Camden is small. Everyone mostly knows everybody. You see officers out
there. It feels good to see them out there instead of in here. I respect them. They just do
their job.

When I asked Alfonso if it he ever had any problems finding work because of his
incarceration he responded:
Alfonso: Officers here, they have connections. They see who you are, they already know
you were incarcerated. They can line up jobs.

Alison: Why did the officers pick you to come talk to me?
Alfonso: The truth? Because I'm honest, I'm a good inmate, the officers know me, the
officers trust me, I'm honest, I'm a hard worker, I'm a trustee, I can go inside the
sergeant's office.

After I completely my interviews, I went back to Philadelphia and began
analyzing my data. I went through all mynotes and highlighted every time an inmate

38

···-·-

-

.... •-- .. :

mentioned a relationship he had in connection to the jail. This could be a relationship the
inmate had with another inmate, or a relationship between the inmate and an officer.

PART IV - CONCLUSION AND DATA ANALYSIS

Although I set out to find out about the changes in identity inmates undergo as a
result of being incarcerated, I discovered a very interesting community in the Camden
Jail. What is most remarkable about this jail is the relationships between both
inmate/inmate and inmate/officer. Each of the inmates emphasized the relationships they
had in jail.
Both Officers Juarez and Caudley commented that "all" of the inmates have
friends and family in the jail. Officer Juarez mentioned 'When [an inmate] come[ s] out,
[into the general population] they are smiling ... When they get out of [admissions] they
get to go live with their friends and family. Once they get out of admissions they're not
scared'. Officer Caudley echoed the opin~on of Officer Juarez. ' ... Most of the inmates
here have been incarcerated here their whole life, this is home. People have their best
friends here, their cousins'.
Eddie told me specifically, he is the head of all the Latin Kings in the Camden
County jail. He knows each of these men, and has control over them. He can order them
to carry out tasks. He also has a strong enough relationship with the officers that officers
come to him and ask him if other certain inmates are Latin Kings. If that other inmate is
indeed a Latin King, and is causing trouble for the officers, Eddie can order that inmate to
·. behave'. Eddie was certainly on friendly terms with Officer Caudley as well, stating, 'I
like Officer Caudley. He doesn't look at us like we're animals - like we are bad people.'
Officer Caudley felt the same way about Eddie. Before I even met Eddie, Officer
Caudley told me, 'Eddie, he's a good guf I mean, he's not- because he's a criminal, but
he's a good guy'.
Out of all the inmates, Troy was the most specific about knowing officers. When
Troy is not in jail he plays for a township hockey team, which includes eight men who
work as officers at the Camden County jail. Considering ice hockey only has six players
on the ice at once, I would imagine eight people is a significant proportion of the team.

39

Troy said that another five officers are his neighbors in the town of Woodside, New
Jersey. These men certainly have many social connections, because Troy said that his
cousin 'does demolition work. He just knocked down [an officer's] house.'
Isaiah and Alfonso both noted that although they aren't close friends with any of
the officers, they are usually friendly with them. Isaiah commented that 'I see the officers
all the time. I see [the officers] ride by, mat a concert or I might see them at shows. I
might see them all the mall - the Strawberry Hill mall, outside Camden.' Isaiah also told
me that, 'I know a lot of people here'. Although Alfonso didn't mention being friends
with specific officers, he said, 'officers here, they have connections. They see who you

are, they already know you were incarcerated. They can line up jobs.'
Ruben also spoke of his relationsl;tip with the guards. He told me, 'guards here
now, that own property, they say, 'Yo man, I'll be glad when you get out, I have work for
you'. Ruben more thoroughly explained that relationship by saying, 'see on the street ...
[In jail] I was in a situation, and the guards just have a job to do. So the guards are like,
what up man, buy you a drink or something. People got family members here. It's cool
though. A couple officers, I did work for them in their houses. It's not a hate relationship.
They [the officers] just not gonna jeopardize they job for you. Like give you cigarettes or
something.' However, it seemed as though Ruben was also allowed some special
treatment. He had been talking to some of the officers in the sergeant's office, and left his
coffee there; According to jail policy, inmates are not allowed in the offices.
Thomas echoed Ruben and Troy when he asserted that just because an inmate
knows an officer, it does not mean the officer will give the inmate special treatment. The
officers are just trying to do their jobs, and will get fired if they provide special treatment.
Thomas remarked, 'Camden County is like a big family. Cops [jail officers] are the
people you grew up with. They have a job to do. [Inmates] will say, 'oh, we went to high
school, played football together, so bring me some cigarettes'. They will ask for special
favors. But cops are just trying to do their job. They try to treat you as a normal human
being. When you act stupid, so do they.' Thomas also told me about the close
relationships he and other inmates had with some of the officers. He told me about his
sister-in-law, who works in the mailroom. He made sure to mention that, 'I don't ask her
for nothing. You have to keep it separate.' When Thomas pointed out his sister-in-law, I

40

thought he was pointing to another officer. He corrected me, and informed me that, 'her
brother used to be in my wing ... He never spoke. He tried to ask her for things. She think
she owns everything.'
Ricardo and Daniel were the only inmates who did not mention knowing other
inmates or officers. This may partly be because both Ricardo and Daniel had their own
agendas of what they wanted to talk about. Ricardo was more nervous, and wanted to
focus on his childh.ood. He told me he had no one to talk to and it felt good for someone
to listen to his problems. Daniel had a hard time listening to my questions and responding
to them. I think he liked to listen to himself talk, and wanted an audience for his views on

life.
I found my entire interviewing experience very rewarding. I think all the inmates
who I spoke with enjoyed talking about t~eir pasts. It would be arrogant to say that I
helped them get their lives on track, but I do think I helped them think about their
situation in a way they might not have before. When the inmates had children, I asked
them how they would feel if their kids would be arrested. Every single inmate told me
that they do not want their children to go to jail. Then I asked them how they would
prevent their kids from going to jail. Some inmates said they would move away from
Camden, others didn't know. I suggested the inmates talked to their children about
choices people make, and what choices the inmates made to get them arrested. I also told
the inmates to help their children with schoolwork and encourage them to stay in school.
I don't know if any of the inmates will do this, but at least they were thinking about it.
It is very interesting that officers are so close to their inmates. Although the
inmates noted that officers don't hook them up with extra food or cigarettes, it does seem
like the officers go out of their way help inmates, especially finding jobs. I did not hear
about any job programs paid for by the city or by the jail, but three of my interviewees
commented about working on personal jobs for the officers. This is not the type of social
interaction I would have expected between inmates and officers.
According to Foucault, the Panopticon is set up so that the guards can watch over
all of the inmates without being seen by the guards. This anonymity is supposed to
further the punishment of the prisoner. However, these officers do not seem to be trying
to impose punishment. The examples of officers helping prisoners upon their release

- 41

...

from jail include both Alfonso and Ruben stating that officers help them get work outside
of jail. This suggests officers are trying to help (perhaps unconsciously) rehabilitate the
offenders.
During high school I volunteered at the Denver County Jail. This jail was very
different from Camden. What was most striking to me was the amount of freedom
prisoners at the Camden County Correctional Facility had. At the Denver jail, inmates
were not allowed to move around the jail. Nor were they talking in a friendly manner
with the guards. The imnates in Denver would bang on the bars of their cell, throw
objects from their cells, and make sexual comments to me. I was shocked that when I had
my tour with Officer Juarez this did not happen. One or two inmates told me I was
beautiful, but nothing compared to the 'will you bend over for me' comments I had in the
Denver jail. Mostly the inmates greeted Officer Juarez with smiles and handshakes.
Overall, I felt like there was significantly more respect in the Camden jail than in Denver.
The freedom that the Camden inmates possessed, I believe, is due to the prisoners
and the jail officers knowing each other outside of the jail walls. Even though not all of
the prisoners have personal relationships, Camden still has a small town feeling.
Another interesting aspect of my interviews was that most of my interviewees
were older in age. The men ranged 29 to 61, but most were in their 30s. I believe the
reason my interviewees were in this older age range was because most of the officers
were in this age range as well. Since the people I interviewed were closer with the
officers it is no surprise that the inmates and officers were school peers who grew up
together and obviously are still the same age. Perhaps by being in the same age range,
regardless of incarceration, allows people to share similar values and become friends.
Troy was the only person who did not consider Camden home. Even though both
Ricardo and Ruben were not born in Camden, when I first asked, "where are you from"
they both said Camden. Only after I asked where they were born did they tell me other
cities. Each of these men, even Troy, is an integral part of the Camden community.
The Camden County Correctional Facility becomes an extension of this Camden
community rather than isolation from the_town. The relationships between inmates and
officers has little to do with whether or not a person has been incarcerated, but rather
what relationship the inmate and officer have outside of jail. These relationships may be a

42

······-·-···

··-·-··········-·-----"'"===

brother and a sister, or teammates. It is these outside relationships that stay intact when a
person enters the jail. In fact incarceration does not seem to change a person's status as
far as relationships are concerned. Being arrested makes one person in the friendship or
classmate relationship a convict. I hypothesized that once a person became an "inmate"
instead of a "classmate" the change in identity would affect the relationship between the
classmates. However, this does not seem to be the case. Inmates understand that in a jail
situation, an officer can't give them special treatment, but the inmate and officer still
have a friendship-based relationship. This most certainly complicates our ideas of selfidentity and status.
The structure of the Camden County Correctional Facility does not seem to follow
the six rules of punishment set out by Foucault. Observers of the punishment are not
taken aback by its severity. Even though the jail is set up with the officers watching the
prisoners from all angles, the idea of the Panopticon does not apply. Prisoners are not
forced to stay in their cell, without interaction among other human beings. The idea of
public shaming does not apply to Camden either. Officers - friends and family of the
inmates- know about inmates' crimes. It does not seem to be a successful deterrent for
friends and family to know about a person's incarceration.
The William James sense of self does seem to apply. Inmates do have a certain
"jail self' in which the inmates in interviewed know they cannot ask the officers for extra
food or cigarettes. In a brother/sister relatjonship it would not be unacceptable to ask for
second helpings of dinner, or bum a cigarette. However, the officers seem to have less of
a different "jail self'. Even though officers know they can't give inmates special items
like food, they do help the inmates by providing jobs. This is a type of behavior one
would expect from a friend or sibling.

In Imprisoning America: The Social Effects ofMass Incarceration, Pattillo et al.
reiterate what I found in Camden." ... Imprisonment is no longer a symptom of deviance;
its sheer extent challenges us to think about incarceration as an increasingly normal event
in the lives of young disadvantaged men" (Pattillo et al, 3). Because so many people are
being arrested it becomes part of the norm. The threat of incarceration can no longer be
used as a mechanism for social control. Officers can still have friend and family
relationships with the inmates because be1ng arrested is no longer looked down upon.

43

,._ ~<,'='----------""'."""'"--~~~'."':'""."-:---:--"""".'"":"""".'"":;-:-:------:----:--".'."."."'.".""':"'."--:---:-------------

This system is a positive feedback cycle. The more people who are arrested, the more
officers continue to maintain friendships with the inmates in jail. The more friendships
that are maintained, the more people will be arrested because they do not see
incarceration as a punishment.
The idea that the Camden jail is an extension of culture is similar to Doug Foley's
ethnographic study of a high school in Texas. Even though the populations are different,
in both groups of people, the town culture is on full display in these locations. Foley
discusses racism in America, by stating, "this study shows how schools are sites for
popular culture practices that stage or reproduce social inequality" (Foley, xv). The
Camden County jail also becomes a site for cultural practices. These practices include
helping inmates find jobs, hanging out in.the hallways of the jail and discussing the town
gossip.
The research I conducted and the data I obtained from interviewing inmates at the
Camden County Correctional Facility is most certainly an interesting addition to the
anthropological database. Similar to Foley's findings in Texas, my findings confirm that
a jail is an expansion of the community ~d provides an excellent setting for cultural
reproduction. It would be fascinating to continue researching inmates at the Camden
facility to determine how explicitly important the jail is to the Camden community, not
only in an economic sense, but in a cultural sense as well.

44

Appendix A: IRB Submission Check List and Face Sheet
Appendix B: Consent Form
Appendix C: Sample Inmate Questions
Appendix D: Protocol Summary as turned in to the IRB
Appendix E: Letters of Authorization from Deputy Warden Simon
Appendix F: Copy of Press Release Inmates Signed
Appendix G: Subpart C
Appendix H: Social and Behavioral Sciences IRB Protocol
Summary Guidelines and Template
Appendix I: Voluntary Informed Consent Template and Guide
Appendix J: Appendix C to Suppart C
Appendix K: Approval form from Mr. Inez of IRB
Appendix L: Camden County Correctional Facility Statistics
printed out by Officer Caudley

,..

A~~noj~ A-·

I
I

UNIVERSITY0FPENNSYLVANlA ♦ OFFICE0FREGULAT0RY AFFAIRS

133 South 36'h Street, Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246

l/1.B SUBMISSION CHECKLIST

I-,.
•
.

Generat Submrsston fnformation:

.

••
••
••
,.•
,.,••
••
••
••
••..

-....
•.
.,

••••

A. All research involving human subjects must receive ,IRB approval prior to initiation. This
includes investigations conducted by faculty, students, staff and others on the premises of the
University of Pennsylvania, the University of Pennsylvania Health System, as well as
investigations conducted elsewhere by any representative of the University of Pennsylvania and
the University of Pennsylvania Health System .

The Social and Behavioral Science Institutional Review Board (IRB 8) reviews and
approves all social and behavioral research (SBS) inv<>tving human beings before the
research is begun.

B. All personnel associat~d with the research protocol must be qualified; and possess the
necess:~ry experience'.· Pers'oRnet associated· with;the research; shoutd fan into-one of the
following categories and hold the necessary credentials:
•
•
•
••

C. All submissions not satisfying the application requirements cannot be reviewed by the IRB .
The IRB will not review incomplete applications. The Pl will be infOrmed within 3 days of
incomplete submissions .

o~ Gar,et~I' M~Ufig, tntorf.fia.ti6n;

•
•
•

•
•
•

•

.

•1(>··

The SBS meets at 12:00pm in the Office of Regulatory Affairs (ORA) on the first
Thursday of every month .
The agenda closes one week prior to the meeting with a limit of approximately 25 actions
per meeting. Review activities include full board studies, full board amendments, full
board continuing reviews and other activities deemed appropriate for review by the full
board committe'EJ.
The deadline for a SBS protocol submission is 8 days prior to the meeting .
All complete submissions are scheduled on a first come first serve basis .
Incomplete submissions cannot be scheduled regardless of when the initial packet was
delivered to the ORA.
If the agenda is full and an action cannot be accommodated. the study will be referred to
the r:Ie.xt appr:-opriate POarc;l fQr. reyiew or the, s~udy wm. be. held for rev.iew al the riext
scheduled me_efing ofthe SBS board. This acticiniS:,based on ttie expertise of board
members on the next available board and the preference of the Principal Investigator
(Pl) .

Note:

••

,,

Principal Investigator
Co-investigator
Faculty Advisor
Study-persennel: Researoh-As-sistant-slorequivalent.
Data managemenVAdministrative

The staff oUhe ORA and the members of.the lRB wiil make everv effort to accommodate
iate submissions. Late submissions may be deferred to the next months meeting if
committee members ascertain that the information was received so late that an adequate
review cannot be conducted.

Note:

•

rn-general, -studies tnveMng prisoners can-only bereviewed-by·iR.8-8. The regutatort

definition of prisoner extends to individuals who are confined to treatment facilities as an
alternative to incarceration.

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA • OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

133 South 36"' Street, Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246

IRR SUBMISSION CHECKLIST
THE PURJ>OSE-OF THEf'OllOWtNG-CHECKLIST IS TO HELP INVESTIGATORS-PREPARE
A COMPLETE SUBMISSION PACKET TO SEND FOR IRB REVIEW. A COMPLETE
SUBMISSION WILL EXPEDITE THE SCHEDULING OF A STUDY AND IS NECESSARY FOR
AN EFFICIENT REVIEW BY THE IRB.
Please Note:

•

The University of Pennsylvania policy a!!ows on!y standing and assodated faculty to be
named as a Principal Investigator (Pl). This pertains to PhD candidates, master degree
students and undergraduates regardless of the extent of their participation.

•

All protocol submissions should include a cover letter signed by the Pl.

1. Face Sheet
D Face Sheet is complete
D Face Sheet is signed by all those required, including Faculty Advisors
and Department Heads if required
D Faculty Advisors are identified with contact information
Face Sheet includes the correct title of the study; title Is consfstenfacross aH documents

D

2. Protocol Summary

D Protocol is prepared in accordance with the format specified in the guidelines; includes the
heading
Research is described in clear terms
D Protocol includes the name of the Pl and co-investigators
D .Title of the protocol· must reflect the nature of the study

D

3. Consent Documents

D Consent documents prepared in accordance with the format specified in the guidelines
D Parental permission document with child assent section for minors (<18 years of age)
D Title of the consent document and the protocol must match unless justified in the
submission
Title of the consent document must reflect the nature of the study
U Documents are written in lay terms so that it is understandable by a middle school student
(utilize the glossary if needed)
D Spelling and grammar corrected, page numbers in the standard format, proper headings,
with the title of the study on each page

D

4; Addltk>na~-Documents;

if applicable

D Grant application
D Certificate of Confidentiality
D HIPAA Form or Request for Waiver of HIPAA Authorization Form
D Subject recruitment materials, advertisements
D Performance site approval letters; other IRB approval letters

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA • OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

133 South 3dh Street, Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246

IRB SUBMISSION CHECKLIST
REQUIRED MATERIALS
The STANDARD SUBMISSION PACKET includes the following items (as aoplicabie), coliated & clipped
together in this order:

D Signed face sheet + attachments
. ., Note: !RB Profoco[Face Sheet requires PI & departmentar head/Dean sfgnature for
primary & all co-P Is
., POR certificates {REQUIRED for all SOM faculty & staff working on the study}
•
Refer to "About" section at http://www.med.upenn.edu/apps/my/por for
more information.
D Cover letter with additional information that may help in the review
□

Protoccl summary {REQUIRED for an submtSSfOOS}

D Informed consent form {include version#, date, & page #s}
.. Assent with parental permission form required for research involving minors.

D HIPAA Authorization or Waiver

* HIPAA Waiver of Authorization (if applicable) requires Pl & department head
signatures
□ Advertisements. brochures, recruitment materiafs

D Copies of test instruments, surveys, questionnaires, inteiView guides, observation
checklist and alike, that are to be used in the study
D Grant application (minus appendices & budget information)
FOR ADMINISTRATIVE ACKNOWLEDGMENT, EXEMPT & EXPEDITED REVIEW:

• 1 STANDARD.SUBMlsstON PACKET containing the original of each of the above documents (as
applicable)

FOR FULL BOARD {all risk levels}:

• 1 STANDARD SUBMISSION PACKET containing the original of each of the above documents
tas app1icable)·PLUS:

D Confidential Flnaneial Disclosure Form

+
• 3 copies of the STANDARD SUBMISSION PACKET, PLUS:

D Confidential Financial Disclosure Form

+
• 15 packets each containing 1 copy of each of the following, collated & clipped together, in
this order:
D Copy of signed face sheet + attachments
D Copy of cover letter
D Protocol summary
.
Q Informed consent form + H!P/\A Authorization
U Advertisements, brochures, recruitment materiais
D Questionnaires, diaries, data collection forms

UNIVERS1TY OF PENNsYLVANIA • OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

133 South 3ffh Street, Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246

SOCIAL & BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES /RB
SUBMISSION CTIECKLIST AND FACE SHEET

I

Grant#

Responsible Org. (4

digit department code)

Full Title 6f
Protocol

I Abbrevimid
Title/Grant Title
Research Type
Principal
Investigator

I

O Faculty Research O Dissertation

□Masters Thesis

Phone

Name
Title
Address.

email
Pen..nCard ID#
1 Phone
email
PennCard ID#

. Nan--.e

Study
PersonnelfCoInvestigator

~y
Personnei/Co·

Investigator

Address
City/State/Zip

Fax#:
(l!, ~it numberi

Fax#:
(8 digit number)

Phone
-eFllffll

Name
· -·Address

PennCard iiJ#

t CiiyiStafe/Zip

Fu#:.
(8 digit number)

List study personnel who have been designated and trained by the Pl to be involved in the infonned consent pn>cess.

Name
Address
t- .CityiStateiZip
Is this protocol part of a larger (Prime) grant? If yes, provide the following:

Funding/Grants

1.

Grant (Office of Research Services Institution #
Status (Pendilg, Awarded}
UYes

□ No

LJYes

LJNo

□ Yes

UNo

UYes

LJNo

□ Yes

□ No.

Title of Prime Grant
ORS # for the Prime Grant.

IRB#

:2.

ht this part of a muffi:,site study? !f yee, list the inefitution name end the i=ederalwide ~ n a e Nt.."?lbers for eaoh eite?

3.

Are individuals not affiliated with the University of Pennsylvania or another research institution acting as co-investigators
In the study?

lf ye.s, c.ontact the Offii.e of Reg_Ylatocy A.ff<!.n (ORA) fur ao. lndepende!li lnveistigatoc Ag.ree.men:t

4. Are other individuals not affiliated with the University of Pennsylvania and not acting as co-investigators assisting 1he Pl
in the research? If yes, explain their role in the protocol summary.
5. Certain wlnerable populations are afforded additional protections under the federal regulations. Human subjects
involved in the proposed acti'.'it-/ include any of the follO'.flling special populations/categories? If yes. consult OP-A for
guidance.
·
·
·

□ Minors
D Pregnant Women
D Prisoners
D NONE of the above listed special populations/categories

D Fetuses

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA + OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

133 South 3(/' Street, Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246
SOCIAL & BEHA VIOP.AL SCIENCES IRB
SUBMISSION CHECKLIST AND FACE SHEET

6. Some populations may be vulnerable to coercion or undue influence. Does your research involve any of the tonowing
groups? If yes, describe in the protocol summary any additional safeguards for these subjects.

D Diminished capacity/Impaired decision-making ablity
D Economically disadvantaged
O Elderly-

f

I

0
7.

D Homeless
D Drug addiction, alcoholism, substance abUse
0 UPeon employees.or.students

□ Yes

D No

□ Yes

□ No

Terminally or serlot.'lSly ill

Has the Principal Investigator taken the on-line Patient Oriented Research training (questions call OHR: 215--746-7400)
• IF YES, attach copy of certification. (required by School of Medicine for an SOM Faculty)
List all study team members {Sub-investigators, Coordinators) and anyone involved with the conduct of the study. If
more 1han 5 names, attach a separate sheet:

- Name

- :Role -

- - PORtraining?-

- hnnCardm #-

REQUIRED-SIGNA'RJRES: 'Tile-department eha,ir'"-s·signature i>r the ·m.ttividuaf &lepartlJle•t'w nh faculty participating
in this study in addition to the principal investigator and principal investigator;s department chair's signature, are ·
required below. If additional signatures are required in excess of the number of spots below, please obtain and identify
the appropriate signatures on another sheet and attach it to this fonn.

·"PnncipaHnvestigatpr (Pl)-Signature
Printed Name of Pl
Pl's Dept. Chair's Signature or Dean's Signature if Pl is Dept. Chair

Date

Printed Name of Pl's Dept. Chair/Dean
Co-Investigator's Dept. Chair/Dean's Signature

Date

Printed Name of Co-Investigator's Dept. Chair/Dean
Co-Investigator's Dept. Chair/Dean's Signature

Date

Printed Name of Co-Investigator's Dept. Chair/Dean
Co-Investigator's Dept. Chair/Dean's Signature
Printed Name of Co-lnves!!gatot;s Dept. Cha!r!Uean

Date

Title of the Research Study: Incarceration as a Possible Mechanism for Change in
Identity
Principle Investigator: Dr. Paula
Co-investigator: Alison
Emergency Contacts: Deput-; \Varden Simon or a.'ly Camden County Correctional
Facility Officer.
I would like to interview you for a research project about how being in jail affects the
ways you think about yourself. I am doing this project for my senior thesis, and I would
appreciate your help. If you choose to participate, please sign this form. If you do not
wa.i,t to, you do·not have to sign this fonn. You were·asked to participate because you are
over the age of 18, and you have had the experience of being in jail. If you have any
questions about this research, please ask me. I will read the form with you as we review it
together. Please ask me if you don't understand anything about this consent form. If you
decide to be in this study, you will be asked to sign this form and a copy will be given for

you !J..J_ ke.ep.
What is the purpose of the study? The purpose is to learn more about whether or not
people's feelings about themselves change as a result of being in jail. None of the
information I receive will ever be published. All names will be changed before I write my
final paper and any information t.1:iat could identify you will be changed. You will not
receive any payment for being in this study.
·
Where will the study take place? The study will take place at the Camden County
Correctional facility for the next four months. The interviews will held in the visitation
area.
What will you be asked to do? I am asking permission to interview you between 1 and 3
times over the next four months. Each interview will last between 30-90 minutes. You
will be one of3-10 people in this study. You will be asked to answer some questions
about how you feel about being in jail. I will not ask you anything about your case, and I
will stop you if you sta.rt to talk about your case because that information is not relevant
to this research study. In order to remember what you te!i me, I willtake notes.
What are the risks? This is a very minimal risk study. Talking about your experiences
might make you feel sad or uncomfortable. Although your confidentially will be
protected in every way possible, there is always a chance someone might koow you were
inter,riewed. This shouldn't be considered a major risk, since this reSearch wiU never be
published and very few people will actually read the final report. Also, I do not plan on
asking you any information that could get you in trouble. I just want to koow how you
feel.
How will you benefit from the study? There are no .direct benefi!s to you by being in
this study. However, there is the benefit of introspection, which means actively talking
might help you reflect back on an experience and make you feel better. There is also the

Version Date Novemher 11. 2005

,.

Pa!le 1 of2

-·

benefit ofby educating me~ I will be able to be more sensitive to the possible identity
changes inmates undergo, if I ever want to work with inmates.

IC

I-.•.
.

..

••
••
••
••
••
••..
••..
..

......
....•

:r•...
~

What other choices do you have? You may choose not to be in this study.
What happens if you do not choose to join the research study? There will be no

negative consequences. Whether or not you choose to take part in this study will have no
affect upon any services you receive at the jail or on any decisions made concerning your
probation or parole.
\\'hen is the study over? Can I leave the study before it ends? Your part in the study
will be over when our interview sessions are finished. All the interviews will be
completed by February, 2006. You have the right to drop out ofin the research study
anytime during the study. You can drop out by telling Deputy Warden Simon.
How wm confidentiality be maintained and your privacy be protected? I wiil keep all
the information you tell me during the study strictly confidential, except as required by
law. The only exception is if you tell me you have a current plan to harm yourself or
another or that you have committed child abuse. The Institutional Review Board (IRB) at
the University of Pennsylvania is responsible for protecting the rights and welfare of
research volunteers like you. The IRB has access to t},js consent form. Any documents
you sign, where you can be identified by name will be kept in a locked file cabinet in my
advisor's office at the Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology. These documents will
be kept confidential. All the documents will be destroyed when the study is over. Your
name will never be used in the final paper; you will be given a fake name when I
reference our interview.
Who do you contact if you have a question about your rights and welfare?: If you

have questions about your rights and welfare as a volunteer in the research study please
contact the Office of Regulatory Affairs at the University of Pennsylvania at 215-8982614. You may also contact Deputy Warden Simon or any other Camden County
Correctional Facility Officer.
Who do you contact if you have questions about the study? Deputy Warden Simon or

any other Camden County Correctional Facility Guards. He has my contact information
and will be able to assist you contacting me. ·
When you si2n this document, you are a2reein2 to take part in this research study.
If you have any questions or there is something you do not understand, please ask.
You will receive a copy of this consent document.

Print Name of Subject

Signature of Subject

Print Name of Interviewer Signature of Interviewer

VeTsion Date November 11. 2005

Date
Date

....

Pare2of2

Alison Peters
Senior Thesis

Questions for inmates:

Basically, I want to know about people's perception of jail.
--Did it change once the person was arrested and/or incarcerated?
--Did being in jail change the person's perception of himself?
--How does the entire situation of being in jail make you feel?

The following are some questions I would like to start by asking:

Background Questions:
--Age
--Where did you grow up
--What kind of neighborhood
--Who with? Siblings, relatives
--What family do you have now? Children, wife, girlfriend
--Who do you live with now
--What jobs have you had, past/present
How is Personal Identity and Breaking the Law Incorporated:
--How old were you when you first got in trouble with police
--Were you arrested
--How did your family react
--How do you feel about jail
--Before you were arrested? Now? (If not the 1st time being arrested)
--Has your feeling toward jail changed over time?
The most important two questions are: How did you feel about jail before you were ever
arrested and how do you feel about jail now? Any subsequent questions will somehow
revolve around these two key questions.

I. INTRODUCTION & OBJECTIVES
Introduction and Purpose:

State the name and purpose of the s!udy.

Name: Senior Thesis: Incarceration as a possible mechanism for change in identity
Purpose: To understand how incarceration affects a person's identity. This research is
solely for my senior thesis in anthropology and I have no intentions of publication.

Principle Investigator: Dr. Paula Sablof

•

Provide the basic information concerning the rationale for the study and the previous data
to support the research.

Background:
Discuss the background of the research problem, prior published data, and the nature of
the research question as well as the resulting rationale for the proposed study.

Basic Information: I want to understand whether or not being arr~ted and incarcerated
changes a person's identity.
Previous Data: There are a number of well documented accounts of incarceration. Much
of the literature I discovered concerned prisons more than jail. I found literature that
supported the claim that jail/prison/being incarcerated was detrimental to one's
personhood, as well as claims that being arrested/in jail/in prison was simply part of
one's lite and life path. For example, gang member and author Colton Simpson
comments on his first experience being arrested as causing more respect in his
neighborhood: "I'm released back to my 'hood to discover doing time solidified my
reputation by proving I'm rugged and raw" (Simpson, 33) However, authors such as Jane
Hubert view incarceration (not just prisons but also mental institutions) as "When people
move into [being incarcerated], they enter a 'marginal state'. They no longer have a place
in the social system ... people who enter this marginal state are then perceived as both
vulnerable and dangerous" (Hubert, 197)
Background:
Background: Most of data I found did not correspond to my topic. I mean, it's
possible I am just not looking in the right place. However, what I seem to be
finding is either gang literature that suggests that going to jail/prison is a
part oflife. For example, one ex-gang member writes about his first time the effects of
his first time being arrested: "I'm released back to my 'hood to discover doing time
solidified my reputation by proving I'm rugged and raw" (Simpson, 33) However, the
gang literature does not actually focus on the affects of being incarcerated. The other
literature I discovered regarding incarceration focuses on the family/community. One

.,..

article in Imprisoning America: The Social Effects ofMass Incarceration, edited by Mary
Pattillo et. al., focused on how having a father in prison breaks down the family unit and
is detrimental not only to the father who is actually incarcerated but also to the mother
raising her children alone, and to the children themselves. I haven't actually found any
literature regarding the change in identity of a specific individual due to
being incarcerated. I have, however, read literature about how drastic life
changes (like being fired from a job) can "threaten" someone's sense of self
identity. I just haven't found the two (identity change and prison literature)
put together. Glynis Breakwell's article regarding "Threats to Identity" develops the idea
that " .. .it has been suggested that the individual may shift positions in the social matrix
and that this will lead to a changed pattern of influences which impinge upon the
identity." (Breakwell, 40) In this publication, Breakwell discusses how changes in social
status etc can be threatening to a person's sense of self. That is, when a person encounters
a situation or life change (such as being arrested/incarcerated) that a person previously
did not incorporate into his or her identity, it becomes a threat. The person must
somehow cope with this change to identity. My study is intended to understand if being
a1Tested/incarcerated DOES INDEED pose a threat, and ifit does, how does it pose a
threat. I hypothesize that whether or not incarceration is a threat to identity will vary
depending on the individual. For my methods, I plan to use the anthropological technique
of interviewing and analyzing as described by Bernard, in Research Methods in Cultural
Anthropology, as well as the guidelines established bymy advisor and other
anthropologists. Since this is my first time doing my own research I am taking a lot of
advice from other people!
•

Summarize the available data (published or unpublished, if available} that could have
significance or which is necessary to place the research in current context of our
understanding of the area.

Summarize: Please see above
•

Discuss how any preliminary data justifies the research.

Discuss Data: Please see above

Study Aims:
•

State the questions and goals of the research study; including the hypothesis being
tested or questions to be explored. Protocols often refer to primary, and secondary
objectives based on the amount of data to be collected and the breadth of area, or
number of subjects to be enrolled.

Study Aims:
Questions and Goals: This study is designed to understand whether or not individual
identity changes when one undergoes incarceration.

II. STUDY DESIGN

.1-·
,.

•

Describe and justify the research design. The study should be designed to answer a
specific research question through achieving the stated objectives and aims of the study.

.

Describe and Justify: Please see study aims

.

-••
,.•
••
•:.•
,.
•..
;.•
..•
•..
..·•
......
E
;

.

~
~

:Ill

]IJt

:

·..

_·.

""••

:.::

Describe in steps how the study will be implemented.

Describe in Steps: I have already contacted the Deputy Warden of the Camden County
Correctional Facility, to make sure that I can interview individuals. Before I can
interview anyone in his. jail, he will have them sign an press release form (please see
attached) as well as my own consent form. He said I can conduct interviews on any day
that works for me, preferably in the morning. Therefore, I will be conducting interviews
on Thursday mornings starting at 9:00AM. Depending on how long each interview lasts,
I will be able to interview between 1-3 different people each Thursday that I come in. I
suggested to the Deputy Warden that I could create a flyer describing my study that could
be displayed in an area that is accessible to all inmates. (Or in multiple areas so each
person has a fair chance of seeing the flyer). If anyone is interested, they will contact the
Officers of Corrections in their area, who will then notify the Deputy Warden as to who
is interested. He thinks that a snowball sampling will work better. Therefore, I plan to
use snowball sampling, with the first recruits recommended to me by either the Deputy
Warden or one of the other guards. I plan on interviewing between 3-10 individuals in a
one on one basis free form in depth interview. I plan on conducting between 1-3
interviews with each individual. The interviews will last between 30-90 minutes. I will
ask interviewees on an individual basis if they will allow me to tape record the interview.
This is analyze my data and write my thesis .

•

Identify the research methods, qualitative, quantitative or mixed method that will be used
to achieve the aims and objectives of the study. Be specific about the types of qualitative
methods such as ethnography, survey, interview, focus group and combination thereof to
be utilized in the research. Explain the significance of each research method in achieving
the overall objectives of the study. If snowball sampling is used, describe how the first
individuals will be recruited.
·

Identify Research Methods: This research is solely qualitative. I will use some
ethnographic methods, such as touring the jail and speaking to the Deputy Warden and
Correctional Officers to gain context and gain a sense of the environment. The
significance of using ethnography in this study is to have the ability to see first hand what
the inmates are referring to, when they speak about the specific incarceration at the
Camden County Jail. Most of my researc}_l method will be through interviewing inmates .
The significance of interview style research is that it gives each person their own voice.
The specific word choices individuals make when discussing their feelings regarding
jail/incarceration will be vital to my study. I will have no surveys nor focus groups. After
the flyers are displayed in the jail, or if for some reason they are ineffective, it is possible
I will use snowball sampling ( as allowed in anthropological research). I will recruit my

.

....

.I
,.
.-•.
.

'

.

••
••
••
:•:..•
••
••
•.•
..

first participants from recommendations from the Deputy Warden and Correctional
Officers.
Describe how the data will be collected and maintained.

Data Collected and Maintained: The data will be collected between 1-3 interviews lasting
30-90 min using 3-10 subjects. The interviews will be conducted within the Camden
County Jail in a room at the Deputy Warden's discretion. (A room he feels will be safest
for both the inmate and me.) The data will be collected by taking notes. I will ask the
inmates on an individual basis if it is all right for me to audio-tape record our sessions.
This is only to help me because I am a slow note taker, and often people talk faster than I
can write. All of my data, notes and possible audio tapes will be stored in a locked file
cabinet in my advisor's office.
·
•

Explain the number of subjects to be enrolled. Once the IRB approves the number of
subjects to be enrolled, no additional subjects can be enrolled without re-approval from
the IRB .

Number of Subjects: I plan to interview between 3-10 subjects. The amount of subjects I
use will depend on how much infom1ation I can gather from each individual. Since I have
not interviewed anyone yet, I am not sure how much I will be able to learn from each
person. There is only one site for this research.
•

State the duration of the study. Be specific in terms of hours, days, months and years.

:

....
:•
....
....
-

Duration of the Study: This study will be completed, and all my data will be analyzed and
written up by April 2006, as this is my senior thesis and I graduate in May. The actual
interview itself will last between 30-90 min. There will be no more than 1-3 interviews
per individual. All the data will be collected between the months of November 2005 to
February 2006 .
•

Describe how the aims of the study can be met within the specified duration of the study.

,

Aims: The aims can be met within the specified duration because this is not a long term
study. I simply want to ask participants how they felt about jail before they were
incarcerated, and how do they feel about jail now. (Now that they are actually
incarcerated.)

.

.

•

Explain where the research will be conducted and where the data will be analyzed. If the
study is conducted at more than one site, such as a lab and an office include the location
of both sites .

Where: The data will be collected at the Camden County Correctional Facility, in
Camden, NJ. The actual room that I hold the interviews in will be at the descretion of the

Deputy Warden. The data will be analyzed once I am back at the University of
Pennsylvania, in Philadelphia, PA.

•

Include the expected duration of subject participation {the amount of time terms of years,
months, weeks, days and hours) and a description of the sequence and duration of all
trial periods involving data collection from subjects including follow-up, if any.

Expected Duration: The subjects only need to participate for a total of 1-3 interviews.
This is a total of0 years, over the course of no longer than 3 months (from October to
February). No participant shalt ··be interviewed more than 30-90 minutes in one day. The
first interview will consist of the bulk of data collection. Please see attached sheet for the
questions I will be asking. Subsequent interviews will only be conducted if I deem them
necessary.
•

For telephone pre-screening, inform potential subjects up front about the location and
duration of the study.

Telephone Prescreening: There is no telephone prescreening.

Ill. SUBJECT SELECTION & WITHDRAWAL
This section addresses the involvement of human research subjects. Describe the inclusion and
exclusion criteria, including that of special populations, protection from risk, recruitment
procedures, potential benefits, the process of informed consent, and the knowledge to be gained
from the study.

Describe the process for identifying, recruiting and enrolling subjects. If applicable,
describe methods for sampling larger populations and randomization procedures if
conducting experimental manipulations.
·

Process for identifying, recruiting and enrolling: Subjects are identified by being held at
Camden County Jail. They must be over the age of 18 and classified as "yellow" or
"orange." Yellow and orange refer to the colored jumpsuits inmates are issued at the time
of their arrival at the Camden jail. Inmates are assigned a number ranging from 1-10,
based on the charge(s), past history of crime, mental and physical health and past
behavior if the inmate was previously incarcerated at the Camden jail. Yell ow and orange
are regarded as "minimum"(} "'.3, sometimes 4), blue is considered "medium" (4-6) and
red is reserved for "'maximum" - inmates receiving a 7 or higher on the classification
scale. Both men and women use this color system. (They will be recruited by the process
I explained above. If they choose to participate, I will be informed and enroll them in my
study as long as they fit the selection criteria.
•

Describe the circumstances and procedures for subject withdrawal from the study.

Process of withdrawal: If a person chooses to withdrawal they will not speak to me, or
ask to leave the interview session. They can stop the interview at any time and ask to
leave. Jfthey choose to withdrawal I will destroy all data I collected on them (and
obviously not use it in my final paper.)

Inclusion Criteria:
Create a numbered list of eligibility criteria subjects must meet to be in the study.

Inclusion Criteria:
Numbered List:
1. Subjects must be 18 years of age or older.
2. Subjects are classified by the Camden County Correctional Facility as
"yellow" or ""orange." Or, simply inmates who have been given a jumpsuit of
any color to wear, thus insuring that they have been exposed to the general
population of the jail and not just a holding cell.
Restrictions: The only restriction I have is age, because I want to focus my research on
adults.
Discuss and provide a compe11ing rationale for the specific inclusion of vulnerable groups
such as prisoners, minors and pregnant women. Other groups may be considered
vulnerable and undergo additional protections on a case basis, for instance persons who
are; cognitively impaired, economically and socially disadvantaged, captive populations,
terminally ill, mentally ill, HIV+, drug addiction, alcoholism, homelessness and the elderly
persons.

Compelling reason for including prisoners: My research question is specifically designed
to target the population of society that is incarcerated. The group of people I want to
work with is specifically defined as people who have been arrested and incarcerated.
Exclusion Criteria:
•

Create a numbered list of criteria that would exclude an individual from the research
study. Generally this would include age, gender, physical or mental conditions.
Please provide a justification for doing so.

Exclusion Criteria:
Numbered List:
1. Anyone under the age of 18 years. The justification is that I want to focus on
adults.
2. Anyone who has never been arrested, and is not currently incarcerated at the
Camden County Correctional ~acility. The justification is that this is a study

attempting to understand whether or not incarceration has an affect on an
individual. If an individual has never been arrested, it is impossible to tell if
incarceration has had an affect. (Since it's never occurred.) They would not
have undergone the necessary life experiences to be able to contribute to this
study.
3. Individuals classified as ''blue" or "red." The justification is to more
specifically study a smaller subunit of the population. Ifl choose to exclude
anyone not assigned a jumpsuit, this would eliminate inmates who have not
been placed in the general population of the jail and have only been exposed
to a holding cell. I believe that if someone has only been in a holding cell and
has not seen the interior of the jail, they do not have the life experience of
"jail" to alter their identity, and would not be suitable research subjects.
4. Individuals who do not speak English, or have such severe mental illness that
they cannot communicate with me in an English, oral interview.

•

There may be other populations that would not be appropriate for the study, list them
and explain why they should not be enrolled.

Other populations: People who are not appropriate for this study are people who have
never been arrested.

Subject Recruitment and Screening:
o

Describe how subjects will be identified and recruited for the study. If snowball
method will be used discuss the process and how the first individuals will be
recruited.

Subject Recruitment and Screening:
Identified and Recruited: Subjects are identified by the process as stated above. I chose to
use a snowball sampling to recruit interviewees. The first individual will be from a
referral from a Correctional Officer/Deputy Warden.
Discuss all the methods used to identify and recruit subjects including referrals from
physician offices, clinics, programs, or through advertisements and brochures.

Recruitment Material: I will use snowball sampling with my first recruits as
recommendations by the Deputy Warden.or other guards.

Early Withdrawal of Subjects:
Describe the scenarios under which a subject may be withdrawn from the study prior the
expected completion of the project. Such reasons might include safety of the subject,

....

failure of subject to return for visits, failure to locate the subject and if subjects withdraw
their consent. Explain any safety reasons in sufficient detail.

Early Withdrawal of Subjects:
Scenarios: Hopefully I will be able to collect all the data I need during one interview
session. However, since the nature of my interview is open and free form, it is possible I
will want to ask some follow up questions. A second or third interview is therefore not
mandatory and will not impede my study, so it is not a great threat to my study if an
inmate is not available to have a second or third interview. (In the event the inmate is in
court, released, chooses to withdraw or some other unforeseen event occurs.) I am,
however, asking to conduct a range of interviews (between 1-3) to give me flexibility just
in case I think of something that would greatly advance my research after the first
interview has tenninated.

•

Describe how subjects can withdraw from the study. The requirements for the process of
withdraw should be consistent with the capabilities of the subjects under study. For
instance, requiring a homeless, mentally ill or illiterate subject to provide to the Pl written
notice of intent to withdraw may be difficult. other options should be considered and
consistent with the group under study.

Process of withdrawal: If a person chooses to withdrawal they will refuse the interview or
will ask to leave the interview session. They can stop the interview at any time and ask to
leave. If they choose to withdrawal I will destroy all data I collected on them (and
obviously not use it in my final paper.)

IV. METHODS AND INSTRUMENTS

Please Note: Included in this section is information on maintaining confidentiality.
Study Instruments:
Discuss the particulars of the research instruments, questionnaires and other evaluation
instruments in detail. Provide validation documentation and or procedures to be used to
validate instruments. For well know and generally accepted test instruments the detail
here can be brief. More detail may be required for a novel or new instrument.

Instruments: Please see attached questionnaire.
•

For ethnographic studies identify any study instruments to be used (i.e. for deception
studies) and describe in detail where, when and how the study will be conducted and who
or what are the subjects of study.

Please see above.

•

For oral histories or interviews provide the general framework for questioning and means
of data collection.

Please see attached.

If interviews or groups settings are to be audio taped or video taped describe in detail the
conditions under which it will take place.

Audio-Taping: I will be in a private interview with one single inmate. I will only audio
tape if that specific inmate grants me permission. The audio tapes will be kept in a locked
file cabinet in my thesis advisor's office. They will be destroyed at the University
Museum in April of 2006.
Method for Assigning Subjects to Groups:
Describe how subjects will be randomized to groups.

Methods for Assigning Subjects to Groups: There will be no research conducted in
groups.
Administration of Surveys and/or Process:

Administration of Surveys: I will not be using surveys in this study.
Maintenance of data security:
Describe the steps to be taken to protect and preserve the confidentiality of subject
information.
•

Describe the use ·01 pseudonyms, code numbers and how listing of such identifiers will be
kept separate from the research data.

Steps Taken: All names of all individuals will be changed before I write my final paper.
All my data will be kept in a locked file cabinet in a secure location - the office of my
thesis advisor. All my notes and anything with identifiers (like names) on it will be
destroyed after I have written my final paper, no later than April 2006.
Subject Follow-up:
Please Note: For SBS research that includes transient groups; describe how follow-up will be
managed.
•

If multiple visits are required discuss methods to contact subjects and what will happen if
the subject is lost to the study before all data is collected.

Subject Follow Up:

..•
s.,
.,•
•.;•
.,
••
.,.,•
•·
•..
.,•
•..
•
,

••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••

Multiple Visits: Hopefully I will be able to collect all the data I need during one interview
session. However, since the nature of my interview is open and free form, it is possible I
will want to ask some follow up questions. A second or third interview is therefore not
mandatory and will not impede my study, so it is not a great threat to my study if an
inmate is not available to have a second or third interview. (In the event the inmate is in
court, released, chooses to withdraw or some other unforeseen event occurs.) I am,
however, asking to conduct a range of interviews (between 1-3) to give me flexibility just
in case I think of something that would greatly advance my research after the first
interview has terminated .
Describe if and how the researcher will assess and track subject compliance with the
requirements of the research .

Tracking Subjects: Since they are incarcerated by the Camden County Correctional
Facility, by definition, the subjects must be in the Camden jail.
Describe the follow-up process in the event that while participating in the study a subject
is imprisoned, committed to a mental hospital, hospitalized for long term care, admitted to
a drug/alcohol residential program, a residential living facility or alike .

Follow-up Process if Subject leaves: In the event the subject leaves the Camden County
Jail, I will not do a follow up interview on that specific subject.

V. STUDY PROCEDURES
Explain sequentially the study procedure, including all the visits, contacts, and
interactions. Also, for research of a sensitive psychological or emotional nature that
recruits subjects vulnerable to the study questions or procedures, describe how
professional attention will be provided for subjects if necessary.

Study Procedure: I plan on interviewing between 3-10 individuals in a one on one basis
free form in depth interview. I plan on conducting between 1-3 interviews with each
individual. If at any point after the first interview I feel my research could greatly benefit
from a second interview, I will contact the Deputy Warden, and ask to re-interview said
individual. All interviews will last between 30-90 minutes. This is the only contact and
interaction I will have with the participants. I will interview them using the questions
(attached) I have submitted to this board as a guide .
Describe the procedures to be performed to monitor the safety or inconvenience of the
procedure .

Monitor Safety: There will be a Correctional Officer present at all times to monitor both
my safety and the safety of the inmate .

.,,,,
.-.
.•
••
••.
•

•

Describe assessments that can be performed to detect and report unanticipated events
that could affect the subject's willingness to continue in the study .

,

••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
•
•

Detect Unwillingness: If the subject is not speaking to me, I will understand this as an
unwillingness to participate and I will see if the study wishes to withdrawal.

VI. STATISTICAL PLAN

I am not conducting a statistical analysis .
VII. ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS:
Benefits:
Please Note: Financial compensation for participating in study is not considered a benefit and
may not be described as such .
Include any potential for benefit to the participant, to society and/or to the research
community .

Benefits: There are no direct benefits to participating in this study. Benefits include
contributing one's thoughts so that a larger community of inmates may be better
understood. There is however, the benefit of introspection. Talking to a person about their
own life provides a pathway for introspection. It is possible that there are great long term
benefits for the greater good of the community such as understanding whether or not
there are threats to ones identity after being incarcerated. Understanding the feelings
people go through when people are arrested could help us better design jails, and policies
regarding incarceration that are less psychologically damaging to inmates as well as
better for our society as a whole .
Subject Confidentiality:
Describe how the confidentiality of subject will be maintained .

Maintained: Subject confidentiality will be maintained by using pseudonyms .
Describe if and how the data will be de-identified .

Data De-Identified: The only people who will have access to my data are my advisor and
me. I will destroy all data that has identifiers (such as names) on it after I have completed
my paper. I will never use real names to refer to the imnates or in my paper.
Explain how the data will be kept confidential throughout the course of the research
identifying those persons in possession of and/or who will have access to the data .
Explain where and how the data will be stored and protected during the active research
process .

Stored: The data will be stored in a locked file cabinet in my thesis advisor, Dr. Paula
Sabloffs office at the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Anthropology and
Archaeology. The only two people who will have access to this data are Dr. Sabloff and
me.
Explain what will happen to the data at the conclusion of the study: if the data will be
destroyed, retained and/or shared with other investigators for future research. If video
and/or audiotapes were used in the data collection process describe the disposition of the
tapes and/or discs at the conclusion of the study.

Conclusion of Study: I will destroy all my notes with identifiers at the end of the study.
All audio recordings will be erased and then destroyed.

Compensation:

Compensation: There will be no compen$ation for participating in this study.
Risks:

•

Typically, SBS does not pose severe or fife threatening risks to subjects. However,
the risk of harm can occur and should not be underappreciated. Some risks of harm
are foreseeable and others unforeseeable. For example, a foreseeable ·risk may
include; psychological distress during and after a study of post-traumatic stress
syndrome (PTSD) that involves subjects diagnosed with PTSD. Another example, a
psychological test that in and of itself is routine and Poses no more than minimal risk,
may be considered more than minimal risk if taken by a person who suffers from a
mental illness, severe anxiety or depression.

•

Other foreseeable risks may include risks associated with a possible loss of
confidentiality. Investigators should be sensitive to the vulnerabilities of the
population under study and how a breach of confidentiality may impact a subject's
standing wrth the community, employer, spouse, school and alike. -

Risks: This is a minimal risk study. I will not discuss any sensitive subjects such as drug
abuse or criminal history with the participants. I only want to know if and how their
perception of jail changed from the time before incarceration to the time after/during
arrest and incarceration. It is possible that talking about jail might make an inmate feel
sad or uncomfortable. Although the inmate's confidentially will be protected in every
way possible, there is always a chance ones true identity might be known. This shouldn't
be considered a major risk, since this research will never be published, very few people
will actually read the final report. Also, I do not plan on asking you any infonnation that
could get you in trouble. I just want to know how you feel. In the event of a possible loss
of confidentiality there will be no threat to exposing sensitive material (because I will
have avoided collecting sensitive material.)

...

Risk/Benefit Ratio:

•

Describe the relative benefits obtained from the research in relation to the potential risks
oft he study. The risk of participating in the study should be balanced against the
benefits to be realized by the potential subject and/or society.

Risk/Benefit Ratio: Since there is no real risk~the risk is minimal, and the benefit is to
the greater good of society, the benefit in participating in this study outweighs the risk.
VII. INFORMED CONSENT

•

Unless waived by the IRB all potential subjects will be provided a written consent
document that describes the study and provides sufficient information for them to make
an informed decision about whether or not to participate in the study.

Please see attached consent form

VIII. FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS

Funding Source:

Describe how the study will be financed.

The study is 100% funded by me. The only cost is the transportation cost - that of
gasoline, and the tolls for the bridge.
IX. PUBLICATION PLAN

State whether there is intent to publish or present the results of the proposed research.
Identify who holds primary responsibility for publication of the results of the study.

None of this data, nor the final paper will ever be published. I am only researching and
writing about this topic for my senior thesis.

···--········---·······
·······---···-·-···-·· ·v·•---·····-·····

~~'f'<X\'t

','

/

/.

. Depart,¢nt
' of Co"Jifections
.,.·

)

·· Jos,eph Ripa

\

S

•
camd~unty

• F#J,otder

Correctional Facility
330 Federal Street
Comden, New Jersey 08103
Phone: (856)225-7632 Fax:(856)964-3207

Making It Better, Together.

£ric M. Taylor

Office ofthe Warden

E-Mail: t!laylor@cm,lllencounty.rom

.· ,'1

- Warden

To:

To \Vhom it May Concern

From:

D/W JamesJ. Simon#03

Date:

17, November 2005

Re:

Inmate Interviews

J (J

'

7i,lJa-,..,4cf:;,,,.~

Ms. Peters has permission to interview inmates within the Camden County Correctional Facility.
The Interviews will be conducted in the visiting area of the institution, it
be conducted via phone
with a piece of I" glass in between Ms. Peters and the Inmate. No Audio Equipment is permitted in the
Institution. The Officer monitoring the interview will be in an enclosed booth unable to hear the
interview conducted by Ms. Peters. Any questions you may have, you may contact me at 856-7562201.

,wl

...

···-··-------··-· ··-··

-·--··---

November 1, 2005

To Whom It May Concern:
I, Deputy Warden Simon allow Alison Peters to interview and audiotape Camden County
Correctional Facility inmates for her senior thesis between the months of November 2005
ana 1•eDmary ..tvuo.
4

..-.

11

h.;.. h

.,/

•

epa.i;tment of Corrections

Office of the Warden
Correctional Faci)j:ty
330 Federal Street
Camden, New Jersey 08103
phone 856.225.7632
fax 856.964.3207
etaylor@camdencounty.com

·camd~unty

ifoseph Ripa

reeholder Liaison

Making It Better, Together.
www.camdeneounty.com

Date_________

----------------

Resident's Name

CCCF#

Name of ne•...tsS~ff~reiil'3neati1'f'
. tn~; ..... a f P..cl'..,a~ .
Name of 'Cft0G~• ~9presenfoo
N-affia ~~dr!-S/,fi~i·sat ien

I,

the above-named resident, have been advised that the above

mentioned reporter wishes to interview me.

------=-----~-r--...--'

r,
do freely give permission to the
above-named news media representative to interview me and I do.·
hereby authorize the news media represented by this person to use
any information gathered about me during this interview for any
legitimate purpose.
I, __________....,,..,...-----' DO NOT give permission to the
above-named news media representative to interview me.

I,
, do freely give permission to the
above-named news media to take photos of me (still, movie, or
video) as well as voice recordings and I do hereby authorize the
use of such pictures or recordings for any legitimate purpose.

I,

-------=--.-------,----- ,

DO NOT give permission to the

above-named photo session.
Resident's signature
Witness

Title

§46.301 Applicability.
(a) The regulations in,thissubpartare-applieable.to all biomedical and,:behavioral
research conducted or,supp,orted bytthe Department Of Health and Human Services
in:volving prisone~ .as su,bjects.
(b) t,othing-in ,this subpart shall be construed as indicating that compllance_wltfl :the
procedures.,set- forth herein will authorize research involving prisoners as subjects,
to the extent such research is limited or barred• by applicable State·or locat law.

(c) The requirements ofthis subpart are in addition to those imposed under the·. :' .,·
other subparts of this part.
§46.302 Purpose.

.,.·.

lnasmucb as·prJsoners may:.be under constraints because of-tbek incarceration
which could affect,their ability to make.a truly ,voluntary and uncoerced decision
{,.
·whether,·or not to participate as subjects in resean:h, it-ls the purpose- of-this subpart,..
to provide additional safeguards ,for the protection of prisoners involved in- activities .·to which this subpart is applicable.
· ·· : , ·,, ,.
§46.303 Definitions.
As used in this subpart:
(a) Secretary,means the Secretary of,Heatth and Human Services and, any other .. ,
officer or employee•of the Department of Health and Hu~an Services to, whom
authority has been delegtt~~d.
(b} DHHS means the Department of Health and Human Services.
{c) Prisoner means any in.divld.ua.l ·lnvoluntarlly conf"'.uied o.r detained Jn a,penat
institution~ The term Is intended to encompass Individuals sentenced to such;an·
institution under a- criminal or civil statute; individuals detained in other f,!Jcillties by
virtue.of statutes or commitment procedures which provide alternatives to criminal
prosecution· or ,incarceration in· a,penal institution, and individuals detained pending
arraign men¼ trlal,. or sentencing.
•.. ,;,
(d) Minimal ri$k is-the probability and magnitude of physical or psychological harm _
that'ls normally encountered ·in the dally lives, or in the,routine medica,, dental, or: ·
psychological examination of healthy persons.

...

ti46~ A.nnlicabilitY...

(a) The regulatio:ns in,this subpart are applicable to all biomedical and behavioral
research conducted or supported by the Department of Health and Human Services
involving prisoners as subjects.

\:.tJ NiG~g

i11 c.11i: :suui,icn;. 311ioi1 iR: ...uu:i.1 Ul;",.1C:3111'-lll,.CLIIIV LIICl&."-Vm;,iia:ui.-.; ..-ii.iii.•"•=

procedures ,set forth herein will authorize research involving prisoners as subjects,
to the extent such research ls-limited. or barred by applicable State or local-la-w•.
(c) The requirements of this subpart are in addition to those imposed under the
~.. .
i:SUUpUI IL~ VI '-1!1:::,C l#AI 'La-

Vl.!!CI

§46.302 Purpose.
Inasmuch as prisoners may be under constraints because of their Incarceration
which could- affect>their ability to make a-truly :voluntary and• uncoerced 'decision
wii1~i.i1c:1 -ui 1'~t,i.,i,.:, pa1;.,..;i1,1ai.c: .a::s ::n,:ujii::._c.::s';u n:.xa,._i., iii. i::d.i1i:: ;.u1ip-.,13c: ui i.i1ii=oeui.riftr1i. to provide addltional··safeguards for the: protection of prisoners involved in activities , ;
to which this subpart is applicable.
§46,303 Definitions.
As used in this subpart:
(a) Secretary,means the Secretary of· Health and· Human Services and any,other"' officer or: employee.of the Department of Health and Human ServJces-to Whomr.
_, .;e

(b) DHHS means the Department of Health and Human Servia!S.
(c) Prisoner means any individual involuntarily confined or detai.ned in-a penal· --, ,
institution~ The term is intended to encompass indiViduals sentenced.to such an .et, ;:.;u
virtue of statutes-or commitment- procedures which provide altematives to.aoiminal;;-:iv
prosecution-or incarceration in a penal institution, and individuals detained pendinD:, -.·,;:;
arraignment, trial, or sentencing.
0

thatis normally,encountered in the daity-Hves, or in the routine medicalrdental; or·):.o;rH
psychological examination of healthy persons.
r\,y~ti

..
,...
•
rl.
ll

••
••
••
••
••
•
118
Ill.It

Ill.It
118
118
Ill
lllt
"'I

18
18
18
18
8
8
8
8
8
~

Ill
Ill

..
.•
8

§46,304 Composition of Institutional Review Boards where prisoners are Involved,

In addition to satisfying the requirements lil. §46,107 of this .part, an lnstlt11tiooa1 ·
Review Board, carrying out responsibilities under this.part with respect to research
covered by this subpart, shall also meet the following specific requirements:
(a) A majority of the Board(exclusive of prisoner members) shall·have no
association with the prison(s) involved, apart from their membership on the Board. •·
(b) At least one member of the Board shall be a prisoner, or a prisoner
representative with appropriat~ background and experience to serve in that
capacity, except that where a particular research project is reviewed by.,more than
one Board only one Board need satisfy this requirement•
[43 FR 53655, Nov, 16, 1978, as amended at 46 FR 8366, Jan, 26, 1981],
§46,305 Additional duties of the Institutional Review Boards where prisoners are
involved.
(a) In addition to all other responsibilities prescribed for Institutional Review
Boards under this part, the Board shall review research covered by this subpart and
approve such research only if it finds that:
{1} Tru;:a".r.t:11u.;u-r,h:.un.,;htt re~w ~c,;a:ntc:nn:o .af ~--Cilte.gor-ie«·-of

research permissible under §46,306(11)(2); ✓
(2) Any possible.advantages ac:cruing to the prisoner through his or
her participation in the research, when compared to the general living
conmt,Ons,. mei:Ucal care, quam:y .of food, amenities and opportunity
for earnings: itl the prison, are not of such a magnitude that his or her
ability· to weigh the risks of the reseai'ch agaiust the :;;alue:of such
advantages·in the limited choice environment of the prison is
.impaire!l;
(3) The risks involved in the research are commensurate with risks
that would be accepted by nonprlsoner volunteers;

to all prisoners and immune from arbitrary intervention by prison
the Board justification in writing for following some·other procedures,
control subjects must,be ·selected randomly from the group of

available prisoners who meet the charactetistics needed for that
particular research project;
(5) The information is presented in language which is understandable
to the subject pop!!latlo!'!;

f

(6) Adequate assurance exists that parole boards will not take into.

account a prisoner"s participation in the research in making decisions
regarding parole, and each prisoner is clearly informed in advance that
participation in the research will have no effect on -his or her

parole;

and
(7) Where the Board firids·there may:tJea,need for follow-up

examination or C!lre of participants· after t!'!e end !lf their partldpatlon~ -_
adequate provision has· been made for-such examination· or·care,
taking into account the ·varying 'len·gt11s of individual _prisoners•
sentences, and for informlng.partidpants of th:is fact.
{b) The Board shall carryout such other duties as· may be,assigned.by the secretary;,_-

{c) The Institution shall certify to· the;secretaOf.~-in such·torm and,manner·as the,.;;
Secretary may requirer•that the duties Of the Board under this sectiorr,have·,been

fu._'illed.
§46.306 Permitted research involving prisoners. --.{.a}; Biomedical ar beha1dora1 .reseatth r.ondnct~tf ·qr s1,pported hy .OH.HS may-.iovolve

prisoners as subjects only if:
(1) The institution responsible,for,·the;conduct of the research has,'

certified to the Secretary'that the;,fnstitutional-Review Board has
approved ·toe research unoet §46.305 of fois subpart; and

solely the following:

......
....
•

{i)-Study of the possible causes; effects, and procf!sses

of incarceration, and of criminal behavior, provided- that
the study presents rio·more thanminimal-riskand no
more than inconvenience to the subjects; ,_

~ u d y of prisons,,as,Jnstitutional structures oriOf• - _ - . ~ ~ e r s asincarcerated persons, provided that the __,,_. ·, stuaypresents no-more"than m11Umairisilandno more:

than inconvenience to the subjects;
(iii) Research on cc;mditions particular-ly:affecting:-. --

prisoners as a class (for example, vaccine trials and.
other resear.cn on1'1epauas·wn1c1'1 is-mudt

n'IOl!e

_,;,,

prevalent ·in· -prisons, than elsewhere; and- research ·on
drug addiction,-and sexual assaults) provide(( that the
stu.d.y .moily;f'.'t:Otl;.!M" ~ ~ aUle.-1ec"!t.a'¥ ~ -

consulted with appropriate experts including,experts.in,·.penology, medicine, ,and .ethicsi -and -published notice, in· the FEDERAL ~EGISTER,of his intent to approf'e such - .·,

research; or
(Iv) Research on practices; both. innovative and ,
probability of improvjng the health or well-being of the -,;

subject. In,cases ln-which those-studies reguire the
asslg,n.ment of -prisoners in a manner,consistent with
protocols approved by the IRB to·.co.ntrol groups which , ._
may

not benefit from tl:le research~ the;study may,· ..

proceed only after the Sec;retary has consulted with ,_

.,_,

approptiate,experts, lndualng· experts ''in· penoiogy, ·; , •.,.
medicine, and ethics, and ,published- notice, in the,
research.

(b) Except as provided in paragraph (a)-ofthls.section.- biomedimlor behavioral ·
research conducted or supported by DHHS shall not involve prisoners as subjects.

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA ♦ OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

133 South 3tf1' Street, Mezzani,w Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246 _

SOCIAL & BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES IRB PROTOCOL SU,WJARY
GUIDELINES AND TEMPLATE

Guidelines and a template for writing a protocol summary are provided below.
The protocol summary must be written to contain elements of information so
the IRB can make the determinations required by the CFR. The guidelines are
designed to assist researchers and facilitate the process of writing a protocol

..h_._ -·1· ,., .,.·nt'ir""'prt"'trt
11·.-~- r&.vi;..,-~~·
S ·umm~rv
-•••• • - 1 _ .L C!1. ""' a,-t' u
, •ct~ ~mr
lu • • n.D • - • • t:V!f.

I. INTRODUCTION & OBJECTIVES

Introduction and Purpose:
•
•

State the name and purpose of tha study.
Provide the basic information concerning the rationale for the study and the previous data to
support the research.

Background:

•
•
•

Discuss the background of the research problem, prior published data, and the nature of the
research question as well as the resulting rationale for the proposed study.
Summarize the available data (published or unpublished, if available) that could have
significance or which is necessary to place the research in current context of oui undeisfanding
of the area.
Discuss how any preliminary data justifies the research.

Study Aims:
•

St.::lte the questions and."goais of U1e research study; including the hypothesis being tested or
questions to be expfored. Protocols often refer to primary, and secondary objectives based on
the amount of data to be collected and the breadth of area, or number of subjects to be
enrolled.
·

II. STUDY DESIGN

•

Describe and justify the research design. The study should be designed to answer a speci'flc
research question through achieving the stated objectives and aims of the study.

•

Describe in steps how the study will be implemented.

·•

-kje,ntffy ·the -r~e~r,:h ·methoos1 {ltla-Htattvs1 ··qtlar-rtitetive -or -mtxed -method -that -will -be -t~tSed· to
achieve the aims and objectives of the study. Be specific aboLr1 the t;.'Pes of qualitative methods
such as ethnography, survey, interview, focus group and combination thereof to be utilized in

the research. Explain the significance of each research method in achieving the overall
objectives of the study. If snowball sampling is used, describe how the first individuals will be
recruited.

....

UNIVERSITYOFPENNSYLVANIA ♦ OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

133 South 3(/h Street, Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246

SOCIAL & BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES IRB PROTOCOL Sl!il-fMARY
GUIDELINES AND TEMPLATE

G.'°..

/,I) If\.
L.-"'~ ' '

;;£.u.Jr-

6
/jQ.£ (.)Q.tJvu'Y'-

¥

•

Describe how the data will be collected and maintained.

•

Explain the number of subjects to be enrolled. Once the IRB approves the number of subjects
to be enrolled, no additional subjec-ts can be enrolled without re-appr0val from the IRB.

· Cl \?o~

-\ fO.Dl'(j\
-Y

o

Please ·Note: ·Enrollment refers to the number of subjects who agreed to participate by
signing a consent document

•

For multi-site studies, be specific about the number of subjects to be enrolled at each site .

•

State the duration of the study. Be specific in terms of hours, days, months and years .

•

Describe how ihe aims of ihe study can be met within the specified duration of the study .

•

Explain where the research will be conducted and where the data will be analyzed. If the study
is conducted at more than one site, such as a lab and an office include the location of both
sites.

•
•

inciude the expected duration of subject participation (the amount of time terms of years,
months, weeks, days and hours) and a description of the sequence and duration of all trial
periods involving data collection from subjects including follow-up, if any.
For telephone pre-screening, inform potential subjects up front about the location and duration
tifmem'<fy
o

•

Please Note: Extensive and expensive travel time may sway the decision of potential
subjects to participate, eliminating the need for the entire pre-screening.

For complex research designs a schematic diagram is appropriate and recommended.

Ill. SUBJECT SELECTION & WITHDRAWAL

This section addresses the involvement of human research subjects. Describe the inclusion and
exclusion criteria, including that of special populations, protection from risk, recruitment procedures,
potential benefits, the process of informed consent, and the knowledge to be gained from the study.
•

~

Or importance: For studies where subjects are tectuited from community or resideniiai drug
and alcohol rehabilitation programs, in house and outpatient hospital detoxification centers, the
juvenile justice system or related educational placement settings or intermediate transitions
sites, return to work programs, rehabilitation centers, psychiatric institutions, half way houses,
community mental health programs or placement agencies or any site where prisoners may be
·!n ~a~~ h:1 fflt ~~$arlo/~ ~ Jatt, ~ P! he~ fuH ~-~s~H-m----ror~1ffrlng

the !ega! status cf pctentie! subjects prier to recruitment.
•

Describe the process for identifying, recruiting and enrolling subjects. If applicable, describe
methods for sampling larger populations and randomization procedures if conducting
experimental manipulations.

•

Describe the circumstances and procedures for subject withdrawal from the study.

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA • OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

133 South 3rfh Street, Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246
SOCIAL & BEHAVIORALSClENCES /RB PROTOCOL SUMMARY
GUIDELINES AND TEMPLATE

Inclusion Criteria:

••
••

•

Create a numbered list of eligibility criteria subjects must meet to be in the study.

•

Jnctude a..raiioo.ale f.or: subj.act salectioo..based. an .r:eview of gander or ethnicity categ_ories
particular to the reseaiCh area being studied and a raUona!e/j~tffication foi ariy exc~usions
based on race or ethnicity .

•

Justify the following restrictions if applicable: age, gender ethnicity and race,
socioeconomic status, enrollment restrictions based on childbearing status and pregnanC'f
and other disparities that may impact on enrollment.
·

••
••
;.:1•

The distribution of men and women should be equitable so they equally share the
benefits and the burden of the research. Therefore, provide justification in terms of
scientific contraindications for unequal distribution of one gender.
Pregr.ant women or womer1 of child bearing age should not be excluded without
sufficientjustification.
Provide a "rattonafe for me specffiea age range anti expficitiy stai:e·the age range-for
both aduits and minors. Unless specificaliy contraindrcated by the nature of the
study, there should be no age restrictions for adult subjects.
If children and adolescents are included in the study, specify the age range and

o
o
o

o

provide a rationale and justification for the selected age range,
o
-v.

I
:I

1,:I

Explain and justify any preferences or restrictions based upon race and ethnicity.

-~-~~n-:r·-~,~~~----sf.:_.~- -rafrrG½~ ~'t1G:- u:~ ~~sf~~-:~:~
equitably distributed thus the benefits and buidens of the iesearch are equitably
distributed.

•

••
:.

~~~1lffib;,w_nnittd.~ut. ~~-pi:,~~~d-~~£1.!¥

o

t

!:.

t
t
t
-t

•
•
t

I

Discuss and provide a compelling rationale for the specific inclusion of vulnerable
groups such as prisoners, minors and pregnant women. Other groups may be
considered vulnerable and undergo additional protections on a case basis, for
instance persons who are; cognitively impaired, economically and socially
disadvanta_ged, captive _populations, tenninally ill, mentally ill, HIV+, drug addiction,

aiconoiism, 'nomesessness anome eiaefi'1 persons.

••

••
••

Please Note: It is common in SBS to study one ethnic or racial group at
the exclusion of others. Please justify why. The exclusion and inclusion

•

SBS can include the study of homeless persons or persons with an active drug/alcohol
dependence or substance abuse history. If such populations are included, the study
procedures should reflect how follow up will be achieved given the transient nature or the
difficult; in locating the subjects. See exolusionaiy criteria .

•

me 1nc1us1on c.'1ter1a ror SBS Wftn attnbutes trom otner disc1p11nes sucn as mecnc1ne a:nct
nursing must be specific for all disciplines.

Exclusion Criteria:

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA • OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

133 South 3rJh Street, Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246

SOCIAL & BEHA VIOP.AL SCJENCES IRB PROTOCOL SUMJt..fARY
GUIDELINES AND TEMPLATE
•

Create a numbered list of criteria that would exclude an individual from the research study.
Generally this would include age, gender, physical or mental conditions. Please provide a
justification for doing so.

•

The exclusion of transient_grou.ps or grou.ps that may be difficult to locate for follow up may
~

•

approprt·me tor Mme sas·researcn. Please exp1a1n.

There may be other populations that would not be appropriate for the study, list them and
explain why they should not be enrolled.

Subject Recruitment and Screei1ing:

o

·oescn1'e 'now st.fficts•v.imue1de1 mnw artarecrJnea--rorirre stuav. ·rr snowoaff metnooVl-~if
be used dlscuss tlie process and how the first individuals wiii be recruited.

o

Discuss all the methods used to identify and recruit subjects including referrals from

physician offices, clinics, programs. or through advertisements and brochures.
~- ~~~~~~.i~~-n-~S~w~~~~~~~~~ .~:::ft~.~~·.-k~nii~
flyera and advertisements. All rec;uttment mateiials must be apprnved by the IRB piioi to
being used. Include recruiting materials with the protocol submission to the TRB.
o

Describe the eligibility criteria and list any special test or evaluations potential subjects may
have to undergo before they are actually determined to be eHgible for the study.

Eariy Withdrawal of Subjects:
•

Describe the scenarios under which a subject may be withdrawn from the study prior the
expected completion of the project. Such reasons might include safety of the subject, failure of
subject to return for visits, failure to locate the subject and if subjects withdraw their consent
Explain any safety reasons in sufficient detail.

•

Describe how subjects can withdraw from the study. The requirements for the process of
withdraw should be consistent with the capabilities of the subjects under study. For instance, ·
requiring a homeless, mentally ill or illiterate subject to provide to the Pl written notice of intent
to withdraw may be difficult. Other options should be considered and consistent wit'1 the group
under study.

•

Even though subjects may be withdrawn prematureiy from the study, in some circumstances it
is important to provide them services or inform;ation such as counseling for conditions noted
during the study.
·

Please Note: Included in this section is information on maintaining confidentiality.
Study Instruments:
•

Discuss the particulars of the research instrument$. questionnaires and other evaluation

1nsrruments m astsn. novrae vanaarton aoeum~ntmion ana ot ptocecrures 10 0~ usba to

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA • OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

133 South 3rl' Street, Mezzamne Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246

SOCIAL & BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES IP.B PROTOCOL SlIMMARY
GUIDELINES AND TEMPLATE
validate instruments. For well know and generally accepted test instruments the detail here can
be brief_ More detail may be required for a novel or new instrument
•

••
•: 4t
••
••

••
•••
t

••
•

the S',XOJBC!S of stuay.

o

For oral histories or interviews provide the general framework for questioning and means of
data collection.

•

If interviews or groups settings are to be audio taped or video taped describe in detail the
conditions under which it will take place .

•

lncluds a copy of any novel or new test instruments with the !RB submission .

•

Describe necessary changes that will or have been made to the study instruments for different groups .

Method for Assigning Subjects to Groups:
•

•

•

'
'
t

Describe in detail all the steps necessary to conduct the interview or for the subject to complete
the sYrvey/instnJments, Describe ~!I procedYres and evaluations to be applied, For instance;
discuss if the interviews be conducted on volunteers following long term ethnography of a
-~~-..:.;t; -~;.~~!'"'sS-"'~ff~'-~~.reor-•~~

•
•

Describe the approximate time and frequency for administering surv~ys and/or e_valuations.
For surveys, questionnaires and evaluations presented to groups and in settings such as high

schools, focus group sessions or community treatment eenter-s explain how the process will be
administered and who will oversee the process. For instance. discuss the potential issue's of

navmg teacnars ana otner scnoo1 pe.-rsonner aamrrnster mstrumems to mmors 'Mlc are sruaems
especially if the content is sensitive in nature.
•

•~

•

Describe how subiects will be randomized to groups.

Administration of Surveys andior Process:

·~

•
•
•

Please Note: For more information on how to conduct ethical and valid ethnographic
research, follow the link

•

~

-:-

For ethnographic studies identify any study instruments to be used (i.e. for deception studies)
and describe in detail where,_ when and how the stud¥ will be conducted and who or what are

Describe the procedure for audio and videotaping individual interviews and/or focus groups and
the storage of the tapes. For instance, if audio tape recording is to be used in a classroom
setting, describe how this will be managed if individuals in the class are not participating in the

~ruUy-_
•

Explain if the research involves the review of records (including public databases or registries)
with identifiable private information. If so, describe the type of information gathered from the
records and if identifiers will be collected and retained with the data after it is retrieved.

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA • OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

133 South 3tfh Street, Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246

•

E
••
••
••
••
•
••
lt
lt
lt

SOCIAL & BEHAVIOP.AL SCIENCES IRB PROTOCOL SUMMARY
GUIDELINES AND TEMPLATE
•

Maintenance of data security:

•

•
••
•
•
••
•

Describe the use of pseudonyms, code numbers and how listing of such identifiers will be kept
separate from the research data.

Subject Follow-up:

°Mlfa:S& Noie: fur S6-s reseatcn thaI inciuties iransieni groups: tiestribe hti\"'1 ldHbvi:.:.:UJJt~tm te
managed .
•

If multiple visits are required discuss methods to contact subjects and what will happen if the
subject is !ost to the study before a!I data is collected .

-...

~:GVr•r~ N-a;yd: t~ :trnS ~~tr~·lv·* as-~as :av~· -ir~ ~ 'WI»~&.,,..rt%' with ft~
requirements of the research.

•

For studies involving prisoners not confined to jail, and in consideration of the high rate of
recidivism, describe the process for follow-up should the subject commit a crime that results in
confinement in a penal institution.

•

Describe the follow-up process in the event that while participating in the study a SiJbject is
imprisoned, committed to a mental hospital, hospitalized for long term care, admitted to a
drug/alcohol residential program, a residential living facility or alike.

•

Describe the follow-up process in the event that the subject falls under the guardianship of
another, the guardianship of the state or in the case of minors becomes a ward or the state.

II
I

Describe the kinds of identifiers to be obtained, (i.e. names, social security numbers) and how
long the identifiers will be retained and justification for use.

8

I

V. STUDY PROCEDURES

•

Explain sequentially the study procedure, including all the visits, contacts, and interactions .
Also, for researeh of a sensitive psyeliologieal or emotional nature !ha! recruits subjects
vulnerable to the study q_uestions or procedures, describe how professional attention will be
provroed' to'r su'b1ecrs 1t neoossary.

•

If necessary, use bullet points or create a study procedures flowchart/table that describes the
activities and procedures to be followed at each contact with the subject.

•

Describe the procedures to be performed to monitor the safety or inconvenience of the
procedure.

•

Describe assessments that can be performed to detect and report unanticipated events that
could affect the subject's willingness to continue in the study .

I

t
I

t
t
t

It

VI. STATISTICAL PLAN

--------------

------ -

-------------~--

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA • OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

133 South 36th Street, Mezzanine Level, PhUadelphia, PA 19104-3246
SOCIAL & BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES IRB PROTOCOL SUAJMARY
GUIDELINES AND TEMPLATE

*Also included in this section is information on maintaining confidentiality.

Sample Size Determination:

••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
!t

!I

•
•
•

Please Note: if a long term study recruits subjects from short term drug/alcohol detoxification
cent0r or similar typ0 treatment facmty iths investigator should anticipate a poor retention rate
with difficult follow -up and design the study accordingly.
Statisticai Methods:

9

•

Summarize the overall statistical approach to the analysis of the study.

•

The section should contain the key elements of the analysis plan, but should not be a

•

Be clear on primary as well as any applicable secondary analyses .

Subject Population(s) for Analysis:
•

This section should be very specific in defining the subiect sub-populations whose data will

·oe -sau~cr-w ·me srotry- amr1y'Sts - --omrr ·-ror me- pnmarr sn~u5rms: 1Iftu'·1:!rty· ~rt:ratr,e·
secondary analyses .

Data Management:
•

Describe how and who manages confidential data, including how and where it will be
~(.bi-CJ a:,Wl a?fG.~i"if:i:;it _F,&i·t-~~(i:,hz..&) •!'¢5,.:';?}~e-{f ·R◊~f 'iYl ''¢~,i!f;-z}(ti'J'r..}t ·fij::j}[:.,j-"~ ·:::1:/tff'if, 'Vit ~- -~d,

how corrections to the report form wiii be made, how data wiil be entered into any
database, and the person(s) responsible for creating and maintaining the research
database .

W. ETHICAL Cffid-SIDERATIONSc
Benefits:
Please Note: Financial compensation for participating in study is not considered a benefit and may not
be described as such .

!I

I
I
I
I
It
I
It

Describe the statistical methods for determining the sample size for the study.
JuSilty adtrn1tnar sUbJecis that m1gnt need to be recruited due to ·a'ropouts.
Give any experience on dropout or withdrawal rates from other studies if available .

c

'rnc1ucte any potent1a·1 ror oeneT1t ro me part1c1parri: 1 Io society anaror lo trie researcn
community.

Subject Confidentiality:
•

•

Describe how the confidentiality of subject will be maintained.

If the research involves the collection of PHI, HI.PAA guidelines for security must be
followed.

•

••
••
••
••
•,.•
:••
•••
••
i•
••
••
•.•
..•
••
••
••
••
•

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA • OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

133 South 36th Street, Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104~3246

SOCIAL & BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES /RB PROTOCOL SUl;.JMARY
GUIDELINES AND TEMPLATE

•

Describe if and how the data will be de..jdentified.

•

Explain how the data will be kept confidential throughout the course of the research
identifying those peisons in possession of and/or who will have access to the data.

•

·t:xpiam -.mere and ·nD'N 'tne aa'ta wm t>e stored and pro'tec'tsd aunrig 'llle active research
process.

/

•

Explain what will happen to the data at the conclusion of the study: if the data will be
destroyed, retained and/or shared with other investigators for future research. If video
and/or audiotapes were used in the data collection process desaibe the disposition of the
;(g~~- -0, rtift..~·. &;~~~~ ·ct( ~;f,t:1· "€..~"°lr~iri.i~i~Q'!'t ·-ii ;;·'(~ ~:cu~y: _
.

•

For data that is retained or shared with other researchers explain under what conditions
personal identifiers will be used, if at all.

•

Explain under what conditions the data may become part of the subject's permanent
record, such as an employment or academic record. Explain how this can be mitigated if
pOSSi010.

Compensation:
•

Explain the types of payments to subjects including justification for the amounts. This
includes re-imbursements for travel, meals and aiike. Be speeifie about the nature of each
type of payment making a distinction between compensation for participating in the
research versus re-1mourseme.'1ts Tor expenses .

•

For study related compensation, state the form the compensation will take such as cash,
gift certificate, tickets, coupons and alike.

•

Explain when and haw subjects will be compensated. Be specific for studies taking place
over a long time where compensation is disbursed periodically.

· •

Compensation is not a benefit to participating in the research and should not be stated as
such.
·

,

o

Please Note: Compensation should not be cn...ercive in any matter.

,

'

•

Typically, SBS does not pose severe or life threatening risks to subjects. However, the risk
of harm can occur and should not be underappreciated. Some risks of harm are
foreseeable and others unforeseeable. For example, a foreseeable risk may include;
psychological distress during and after a study of post-traumatic stress syndiOme (PTSD)
that involves subjects diagnosed with PTSD. Another example, a psychological test that in
anti of 'ilserf is rcrorrrre ar!O puses no nrore man minimaf Tr&!'~, may oe i.;u111:>iuereti-rm.::ire rnan
minimal risk if taken by a person who suffers from a mental illness, severe anxiety or
depression .

...

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA • OFI1CE OF REGULATORY AFFAms

133 South 36" Street, Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246

SOCIAL & BEHAVIOP.AL SCIENCES IP.B PROTOCOL SUMMARY
GUIDEUNES AND TEMPLATE

••
••
••
•

••
••
•
••
I
I
I

I
I
I
I
I
I

t
t
I
t

•

Other foreseeable risks may include risks associated with a possible loss of confidentiality.
Investigators should be sensitive to the vulnerabilities of the population under study and
how a breach of confidentiality may impact a subject's standing with the community,
employe;, spouse, school and alike.

o

-t7on5t{5 .wftrr.attrtblites or bitler'CnSCipnnSs sucn ss_ msaic1ne anCl nursing wtiere·ttie suo1ect
needs lo undergo a blood draw, MRI, DEXA scan, CAT scan or other medical tests, the
risks associated with those tests should be fully described .

Risk/Benefit Ratio:

*

study. The risk of participaiing in the study should be balanced against the benefits to be
realized by the potential subject and/or society .

VII. INFORMED CONSENT
o

Unless v;aivad by the IRS all potential subjects -.viii be provided a vvritten consent document
that describes the study and provides sufficient information for them to make an informed
decision about whether or not to participate in the study .

•

A copy of all consent documents should be included with the submission to the !RB. The
<mrn>Af>I dor:rnn<>I>i will t,,, r,witawed ruld ,mnmv,m hl' !h<> !RR

•

The formal consent of a subject, using the !RB-approved consent form, must be obtained
before that subject participates in a study activity.

•

The subject or a legally authorized representative must sign the consent document for it to be
legally valid .

•

The !RB can waive the requirement for informed consent either verbal or written. Please refer to
the section on Voluntary Informed Consent for more information.

VIII. FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS
Funding Soutce:
•
•

t
t
!')

I

Describe how the study will be financed.
If support is through a federal grant, a copy of the complete grant application must be included
.an- a-ttar-~t

RS

•

,
I

Gie;;rvf~i:-tr :;;-;,11/l, ·t~-ffi~,,~a_.01!:rloiY(a •,::;-;;;.{:mn~ti·· (1·vta .:;;;~1.;;,··'1',:'.;""d"e\::i=t'G;!,'liT"'(e-}e!"tft::,.-yf;ro,..:~h.:::r·fA1'{:e'~~i({e;~-·,·~it~ ·;.:,f{:;fib'

The IRB is required to independently determine that the investigator has sufficient funds and or
facilities available for them to complete the study. While this is usually part of the assurance
from the department, the !RB may require separate confirmation

IX. PUBLICATION PLAN
•

State whether ihere is intent to pubiish or present ihe results of the proposed research. identify
who holds primary responsibility for publication of the results of the study.

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA • OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

133 South 36'• Street, Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246

social &: Beniivioiiil Sckiiiiiis

Introduction

Informed consent is a person's voluntary agreement, based upon adequate knowledge and
understanding of relevant information, to participate in research or to undergo a diagnostic,
therapeutic or experimental procedure. Informed consent is essential for studies involving
humans. Participants need to understand why the research is being pursued, why they are being
asked to participate, what procedures, methods and time commitments are involved, and the
potential risks and benefits.
Voluntary informed consent is a critical process in protecting human subjects. However,
obtaining a voluntary informed consent may not be sufficient if the process and/or the content of
the consent fails •to meet the federal requirements. Of particular importance, failure to fully
inform a subject or their legally authorized representative of foreseeable harms that may occur
from participating in a study is considered negligent. The IRB serves as a gatekeeper to assist in
thP: ,lf~vAlnpme:nt ~mi :L-ni:plAment.i:ttinn nf~ v~lin p-rnr:AC:C: nfvr.lunt.!uy infnnnArl

(',f\fl'I.P.nt.

'Tlu:~rP.fn-rP:,

before subjects are recruited the IRB must approve the methods for securing voluntary informed
consent and all written consent documents. When applicable, the IRB can waive the requirement
of informed consent or written documentation of informed consent.
The Ethical Foundation of Voluntary Informed Consent

Voluntary informed consent is one of the fundamental principles underlying the ethical conduct
of research with human subjects. It is embodied in common law and was adopted by U.S. and
international policies and regulations that guide human subject's protections. The principle of
voluntary consent was adopted in the Nuremberg Code of 1947as a fundamental right of
individuals who participate in research. Informed voluntary consent was always codified in
TT);;-:. ,!:Inti intAnu,tinni:tl pnli<'.iP.c: anrl -rP:gnlm-innc:

i:.c: ~

principlP: pJP,tTient in thA ethir:~.1 f',nntlnr:t nf

research. For more information see the following documents:
•

National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and
Behavioral Research, Ethical Principles and Guidelines for the Protection of Human
Subjects of Research (1979), otherwise known as the Belmont Report;

•

World Medical Association; Declaration of Helsinki (current 2000).

Anyone conducting research on human subjects should be familiar with the three major ethical
principles embodied in the Belmont Report.

•
•
•

Respect for persons
Beneficence
Justice

•

UNIVERSITYOFPENNSYLVANIA ♦ OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

133 South 3(/h Street, Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104..3246
·,

.... Social & Behavioral Scie,wes

Researchers should consider the ethical principles as the fooo,1atiou for the practice of etliical
research. It is imperative that these principles be applied to the conduct of research and reflected
in protocols and consent documents submitted for review.
The three ethical principles; respect for persons, beneficence and justice underscore the
regulatory requirements that are to be met when conducting research on human subjects.
The three regulatory requirements include:
•
•
•

Informed consent
Assessment and appropriate balance of risks and benefits
Fair procedures for selection of research subjects.

Please Note:

•

The protection of confidentiality is supported in 1he 1hree regulatory requirements even
though it is not clearly specified.

Responsibilities of the Pl include:

•
•

e

•
•

Assure that informed consent be obtained by qualified personnel who know enough about
the study to respond to questions asked by the potential subject.
Obtain a legally effective informed consent from each participant or from the
participant's legally authorized representative prior to his or her participation in the research, Wlless this requirement has been waived by the IRB.
Un!ess ,~13.ived by t.'1.e IP...B, obtain a ,,'Otten consent doc~--nent that is signed and cL~d
when the subject or their legally authorized representative gives informed consent.
Obtained an informed consent before completion of screening activities that is solely
performe-0 to detennine a prospe-ctive participant's eligibility to be in the research.
Seek consent only under circumstances that provide the potential subject or their legally
authorized representative, sufficient opportunity to consider whether to participate and to
minimize the possibility of coercion or llll.due influence.

The IRB must approve all consent documen~ assent forms, and scripts. H these forms are
changed, altering the content of the consent drn:ument, the IRB must approve the changes
prior to use of the revised consent document
The Process of Voluntary Informed Consent
1. Defmition:

Informed consent can be defined as providing an individuai or their iegatly authorized
representative with accurate and complete information of the procedures, risks and benefits,
al!en,Htives m1d other rekwant fofonnation about the study fhey a1·e beine aske.d t'J jtJ111.
2. Process: Voluntary informed consent is a process, an interaction; it is NOT a drn:ument.

Federal guidelines and international agreements place great importance on the process of
obtaining informed consent. The process refers to an informative exchange between the PI and
the potential s-ubject wliere all relevant information about the study is clearly conveyed. Idea.h'y

....

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA + OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

133 South 3(/h Street, Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246

Social & Behavioral Sdtt!nces

the process of an .infonnative exchange ls to respect the individual as ail autonomous agent and to
aid them in understanding the risks and obligations of participating in the study. Depending on
the research design the process for informed consent and documentation of informed consent can
vary.

3. Purpose: A consent document is considered well written if it is effective in purpose.

••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
111
111
111
111

••
••
••
••
••
••

The purpose of an informed consent is to protect the rights and welfare of participants in research .
Investigators- should keep this in mind when consenting their subjects regardless of whether the
informed consent process includes a formalized written document, relies on a verbal exchange
and/or necessitates the participation of a legally authorized representative. For written
documentation of informed consent, investigators should not assume that long, detailed, technical
rlQP.l!ffiP:nt~ ~m"I thP: mo1.:1.t P-ffer,tivP: 1n r.onvP:y1ng informi:1rion .
4. Efficacy: A consent document must embody three elements

An effective informed consent process must embody three elements; a full disclosnre of all the
relevant information about the proposed research in a language and manner understandable to the
pokmtial subject; amL inili viduals are lh::e io 1nake a decision io parti,.apai.t:: or noi wiiiloui
pressnre. undue influence or coercion from the PI or a third party.
5. Exculpatory language: Prohibited.

A consent document should not be written as an instrument to legally protect institutions,
investigators or sponsors of research. Terminology in the consent document that attempts to
waive the subject's legal rights or protect institutions, investigators or sponsors from liability for
negligence will be deemed invalid .
Please Note: Examples of exculpatory language that would be prohibited: "I waive my right to
he cm,~nen<ated j/Jr injuries that T may sustain from partic~nating in this research" or, "T agree to
hold _ _-c-~ (the PI) and/or the University ofPennsylvania harmless in the event that I sustain
an injury while participating in this research", or "If I sustain an injury while participating in
the study I agree not to hold _ _ (the PI) and /or the University ofPennsylvania responsible
for damages. "

Specific Elements of Information for Voluntary Informed Consent

The federal regulations (CFR) require a legally effective informed consent to include eight (8}
specific elements of information, unless the !RB grants a waiver of any of the eiements. The CFR
also provides six (6) additional elements of information that when applicable must be included in
the informeJ] consent The sLx elements should be evaluated on a case basis to detennine if ~my or
all of them are applicable to the study and relevant to the decision of the participant.

Eight (8} Required Elements of Information for an Informed Consent
(1)
(a) A sialeiue1d, i.lie study involves research

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA • OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

133 South 36th Street, Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246

Social & Behavioral Sciences

(b) Ail explanation of the purpose of the research
(c) The expected duration of the subject's participation in the research
(d) A description of the procedures to be followed
{e) Identification of any experimental procedures
•

••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••

•

•

•
•

•

•

•

•

•

This section includes a statement that the individual is being invited to participate in
a research study.
The statement that the study is research should be emphasized. If necessary, this
section should also draw a clear distinction between research and clinical treatment,
therapy, counseling, etc .
Be specific about the purpose of the study and why they are being invited to
participate. Describe the eligibility criteria and any methods used to dete1 ,,.:ne
eligibility if applicable.
·
Explain the purpose of the study, wby it is important and what kind of knowledge might
be gained,
This section of the consent document should provide the individual with sufficient
information about the purpose of the study, the necessary procedures, where the
study will take place and the required time commitment.
For studies that are complex in procedural design, involve travel and a substantial time
commitment consider using charts, tables and diagrams to organize and convey
expectations and complicated information.
Clearly describe the sequence of events and identify procedures and activities that are
routine, standard of care and/or investigational in nature. Tnclnde a description of the
screening procedures used to determine eligibility for enrollment into the study.
Describe the type of questionnaires, assessment scales, surveys, interviews, or other
i.'lstruments used to screen subjects for eligibility and/or acquire data. If questions are of a
sensitive nature and/or designed to probe into personal issues provide the individual with
a sample of the questions. If minors are the subjects under study, provide the parents with
a sarnpl~ of ilu: quesiiuns as well .
Notify individuals that some sensitive questions can elicit emotional responses and that
they can refuse to answer questions. fuform the subjects that if the process of answering
sensitive questions they become upset a professional will be available .
If the study is being conducted for a thesis or dissertation explain this and identify the
faculty mentor in lhe consent document. This can be addressed at the top of the
consent document where the PI is named .

(2) A description of any reasonably foreseeable risks or discomforts to the subject;
•

Typically, social science and behavioral research does not pose severe or life
tn '-'nbjPcts. PorP,<;'P,P,r,ihlP riQl.,.i may _ipr-lur\p.• r~rchnlngi. . al d,i1;1-trP.Q1.!
during and after the study, physical discomfort, risks associated with a loss of
confidentiality, embarrassment, stigmatization, and/or adverse effects on the subject's
status at his/her place of employment, school, social program from which the subject
is obtaining services, etc.
The document should clearly state all possible risks regardless of severity. It should
also state what measures have been implemented within the study design to minimize
the possibility of occurrence of such risks .
thrP.atP.1"11n~ 'Mslcs

•

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA • OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

133 Sauth 3rfh Street, Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246

Social & Beltavioral Sciences

•

•

w'hiie writing the proiocoi, Pi should be <,Te-dllve when deiennining all possible risks.
For example, mentioning the risk of a breach in confidentiality may not be enough,
unless the docwnent states what such a breach could entail (e.g. public
embarrassment, stigmatization, loss of employment, etc).
You must be sensitive to the vulnerabilities of the population Wlder study. For
ex.ample, a psychological lest that in and of ilself is routine and poses no more than
minimal risk, may be considered more than minimal risk if taken by a person who
suffers· from severe anxiety or depression.

(3) An adequate description of any benefits to the subject or others that may reasonably be
expected from the research:
Your study may be beneficial at different levels-to the individual (directly or indirectly), to
society. to the research connnunity, etc.
• The consent docwnent is most concern with benefits to the individual, and the presence
or absence of such should precede benefits to the community, society, etc.
• When determining what direct benefits are there to the subjects, Pls should ask
+t..em....lV""" hour th.. ""b•i"'"ts
••••,.;1t 1-...
,....... ,...f "'"""0b•1•t.r l.ett..,. ,.-A,..,.
i;,,u
......u11w1, ..,.;+1.. " h•gh d...
"".,f:,-L'""'-'
participating in the study.
• If there is no direct benefit to the subject;, the consent document should clearly state the
ca...~. Common consent language to express the look of dii-ect be..iiefit includes "there is
not direct benefit to you;" or ''you may not benefit in any way from participating in this
study."
.......

:.L

13'1,,,1

""..,.

...

~

~

LLI.

.-,.1.Ll.l. U. .LU

V..L yui.11i.11.1:.

....1 ..:,-,. U'IW .. ~

U,,J.11,.'4

•

Once this has been said, it is acceptable to mention other levels of benefit Any potential
benefit to society and/or to the research community should be acknowledged only after
stating the benefits to the individual, or the lack of such.

•

Financial compensation for participating in the study is not considered a benefit and
may not be described as such.

•

Having a chance to share feelings, frustrations, etc, generally does not count as a
direGt b@nefi.t,

(Example: A participant in an interview aboutjob satisfaction in an industry will not directly
benefit from bemg mtervzewed However, this study could mJluence policy makers to improve the
worldng condition ofthe industry. Therefore, the subject may benefit indirectly, by being a
member ofa group. Also, the study may expand the literature on high risk industrial

orgamzatton, wfitch ts acceptable to mentton m the consent docmnent, but it does nm trans/me
into any direct benefit to the subject).
(4) A disclosure of appropriate alternative procedures or COW'Ses of treatment, if any that might be
advantageous to the subject;
•

Disclose appropriate alternative procedures and courses of treatment if available.

.,...

••
••
••
••
i.:.•
••
•:.•
:•••
••
•!.•
••
••
••
••
•

UNIVERSITY0FPENNSYLVANIA • OFFICE0FREGlJLAT0RY AFFAIRS

133 South 36th Street, Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246
Social&. Behavierm Science~

•

If the oniy alternative to participation is not to partic,,-ipate, the consent docmnent shouid
clearly state this while reassuring the subjects that there will be no adverse consequence
for deciding not to participate.

(5) A statement describing the extent, if any, to which confidentiality of records identifying the
subject will be maintained:
•
•
•
c:

•
•
•

•

Describe how the data will be de-identified.
Explain how the data will be managed through.out the course of the research
identifying those persons in possession of and/or who will have access to the data.
Explain where and how the data will be stored and protected during the active
research process.

Explain what will happen to the da-4-ta at the conclusion of the study: ift.1lc data nill be
destroyed, retained and/or shared with other investigators for future research. If video
and/or audiotapes were used in the data collection process describe the disposition of
the tapes and/or disos at the c-0nolusion oftlie study.
For data that is retained or shared with other researchers explain
what
conditions personal identifiers will be used, if at all.
Explain under what conditions the data may become part of the subject's pennanent
record, such as an employment, medical, or academic record.
Notify subjects that should the PI become aware of certain foreseeable circumstances
such as child abuse or sexual assault they are obligated by iaw to contact the
appropriate third parties and in doing so the participant may be named. (Include a
paragraph)
If the study involves audio /or videotaping, these are considered data, and all of
the above apply to them. The consent docwnent should explain how confidentiality
and privacy of the material in the tapes vvill be maintained. Explain how the data will
be transcnbed, stored and what will happen to the tapes/discs when the study is
completed or if a subject withdraws before the study if complete.

under

(6) For research involving more than minimal risk, an explanation as to whether any
compensation and/or whether any medical treatments are available if injury occurs and, if so,
what they consist ot: or where further infonnation may be obtained;
(7) An explanation of whom to contact for answers to pertinent questions about the research and

research subjects' rights, imd whom to contact :in the e.vent of a resear<'_h-related inju..ry- to the
subject;
•

In the consent docwnent, (typically at the top of the title page) :include the name, title,
address, telephone and email address of the PI, co-investigators and other responsible
persons. Explain in the body of the consent that these individuals should be contacted
for questions related to research and reiated injuries.

•

Explain that the ORA should be contacted for questions related to the rights and

welfare of research participants. 1nclude the address of the ORA, telephone number
(include a toll free number if possible) and email address.

UNIVERSITY0FPENNSVLVANIA • OfflCE0FREGULATORYAFFAIRS

133 South 3(/h Street, Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246

Social & Beha-i1ioral Sciences
(8) A statement that pruticipation is vohmtw.y, that refusal to participate at anytime will involve
no penalty or loss of benefits to which the subject is otherwise entitled.

••
••

••
••
•

••
••
•
••
••
••
••
•t
I

•

The purpose of the regulation is to extinguish feelings of coercion that may arise
when an individual is in a position of perceived subordination, i.e. a research subject
to the PI. SDS research is frequently conducted in neighborhoods or facilities that
seIVe the poor, minorities, persons in recovery from alcohol or drug abuse, mentally
ill, or groups who exhibit risky behaviors. In these cases the subject may feel the PI.
who may or may not be involved in their care, will be disappointed or angry if they
withdraw from the study. Such concerns are common and can influence the
individual decision-making process. To satisfy the requirements of this regulation
consider the following recommendations if appropriate:

•

Explain individuals are free to decide to participate in the study, not to participate or
withdraw from the study at any time without prejudice.

•

Also, explain that regardless of their choices, they will not loose any benefits,
jeopardize job standing, grades, status on athletic teams, therapies and/or services
that they are receiving including health care.

Six (6) Additional Elements of Information for an Informed Consent
(Required When Appropriate)
As appropriate, the PI should provide pertinent information that might aid the individual in
making an informed decision as to whether to participate in research. The following additional
elements of information are stipulated in the federal regulations and should be incorporated in
informed consent if applicable.

(1) A statement that a particular proc.edure may involve risks to the subject (or to the embryo or
fetus, if the subject is or may become pregnant) which are cmrently unforeseeable;

•

',I

I
I

t

••
••t

•

Please Note: This requirement may be more applicable in the medical sciences or in
SBS research with attributes of medicine and/or nursing, or in those studies involving
magnetic resonance imaging procedures.
In studies that are greater than minimai risk, there is aiways the potentiai for
unforeseen risks. It may be difficult or impossible for a PI to predict all the
potential risks associated with procedures of an uncertain nature. Therefore, if
subjects are enroiled in a study that is greater than minimal risk and there is a
possibility that the procedure may involve unforeseen risks, the CFR require this
information be disclosed to the subject.

(2) Anticipated circumstances under which the PI may terminate participation without regard
to the subject's consent;
•

Particular circumstances may arise that warrant the removal of a subject from the
study. It is the responsibility of the PI to remove the subject. Circumstances that

,varrant such a....'ii.on :include:

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA • OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

133 South 36h Street, Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246

Social & Beha-,;ioral Sciences

•
•
•

••
••
••

••
••
••
••
•

••
ll
ll

ti
ti
ti
!J}

9
9
9
9
9

••
••

Subjects who do not follow the study procedures,
Subjects whose safety was in jeopardy.
Subject is disrespectful of the opinions of other subjects (in focus
groups or group discussions).

•

Tn thP t"nfl<:Ppt dncumpnf i{p,QcrihP any other c--i-rt"u..mo;ihml"P,1;' th'-'lt ur111 OPt"e'-!Q-ifatP
withdraw of a subject from a study. In doing so, individuals will have more
information about what is expected of them if the choose to join the study.

•

Refer to dissenting behaviors for studies involving children.

(3) Any additional costs to the subject that may resuit from participation in the research;

•

If applicable, explain that the subject may incur expenses directly associated with
participating in the study and that the subject is responsible for those expenses.
For example, study related expenses might include the cost of fransportation,
hotel and food that are specificallv
not covered under the study.
.

•

.

The participant should be informed of any study related procedures that will be
billed to their health insurance and that co-pay, deductible or partial payments are
their responsibility.

COMPENSATION:

•

If the participants will be compensated, this should also be stated in the consent form .

•

The consent document should also discuss whether full, partial, or no compensation will
be provided to those who opt to withdraw before the culmination of the study.
For studies in which participants will be compensated at different rates, or for completing
a certain number of activities, a clear schedule of payment should be included stating

•

when, how mucl1, a.."'1d for doi"'1g what \.v:ill the pa.'"1:icipants be paid.
•

•

•

Financial compensation should not be so high as to unduly influence the possible subjects
to accept participation. A too generous compensation can also influence parents to
involve their children in the study against the child's assent.
If the compensation is in the form of a raftle, the expected number of subjects should be
disclosed as well as a numerical statement of the probability to win in lay terms ( e.g. 1
person out of every 20 will win the $20 gift certificate).
If the compensation is in the form of extra course credits, the credits should not be denied
to those who prefer to withdraw prior the completion of the study without providing them
with another opportunity to obtain the same amount of extra course credit.

(4) Any consequences of a subject's decision to withdraw from the research and procedures for
orderly termination of participation by the subject;
•

Explain the consequences of withdrawing from the study. When a subject decides to
withdraw from a study, they should be provided with information and/or

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA + OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

133 South 3rfh Street. Mezzanine Leve~ Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246
Soclal & Behavioral Sciences

f

•'•
••
·'

reeoulilleudations foi· alternatives to .seiviceS they were rece.iviug while participating,
such as counseling, therapy and trea1ments. For example, if an obese person is emolled in
a weight reduction study and chooses to withdraw they should be provided with
information about other programs and their ulterrurtives, both within the research context
and not., if appropriate.
•

:9

program. In this case there may be social and psychological impediments that
interfere with the subjects ability and/or desire to write a statement and forward it to
the PI in a timely manner. Those factors may include: illiteracy, lack of motivation,
lack of resou.rces, stress, depress.ion aud cognitive tinpairment.

••

''t
:,·.t
·t

'•

ii

•·

••
••
•••

••

.,

Explain what procedures a participant should follow if they want to withdraw from a
study. Typically, subjects can withdraw in writing or verbally. You may request
written documentation of a participant's intent to wi1hdraw and in most
circumstances this request is appropriate. However, in particular situations it may not
be appropriate to require a subject to provide a written statement documenting their
intent to withrlrnw. The procedure to withdraw from the sfnrly should he consistent
with the capabilities and resources of the subjects enrolled in the study. For instance,
a study of lower income minority women enrolled in a substance abuse day treatment

(5) A statement that significant new :findings developed during the course of the research which
may relate to the subject's willingness to continue pm1.icipation will be provided to the subje4,,-t.;
and

•

During the course of the research it may be necessary to inform subjects of
significant new findings. New facts may impact a subject's willingness to continue in
the study.

•

Relevant findings discovered in the course of research may reqttlre that you re-consent the subjects. At t.nat time, the process ofL1lfonned consent <il.hould include the
new information.

(6) The app-Ioxilnate number of subjects involved in the study.
•

Tnfonning potential participants of the number of subjects enrolled in a study may
influence their decision to participate. For instance, potentiai subjects may feei
is less risk in a study where they are 1 person in 5000 as opposed to 1 person in 50.

•

For multi-site studies, include infonnation about how many subjects will be enrolled
at each institution.

mere

t;

I;
l.-

•)

.,
,

Instructions for Writing a Consent Document

If your study does not meet reguiatory requirements for waiver of consent and/or documentation
of consent you will need to obtain written infonned consent from the persons you are asking to
voluntee1· as n~search sul~e.c!s in your study. TI•e process «Jt· doine so, and a template for writine

•1

~
I)

IJX;;. :..

....

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA • OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

133 Svuth 36h Street, Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246

Sueial & Behm,ioral- Scierwe~·-

a consent doclillie11t are outliued below. Insbuctions and guida..uce are provided in italics. Please
remove the italicized instructions from yonr consent document.
Be aware that some of the text in this template is very general and it may not apply to yonr
study. Coping-and-pasting from this template without revising for contradictory or
irrelevant information may result in unnecessary delays at the time of review.

••
••
••
••
••
•
•
9

9

••
••
••

••
•
8
8

8
8
8
8
8
8

11)
11)

In the consent document the subject will learn important information about the study that they are
being asked to join. Please keep in mind the process of consent includes a dialogue between the
PI and the individual about the procedures, risks, alternatives and other relevant issues pertaining
to the study. A written consent document is a supplement to the entire consent process .

Consent documents are reviewed by t_he IRB just as all otJ1er documents. Hu_man subje,ets muu1ot
be recruited nor participate in research unless the consent document has IRB approval. Please
utilize the instructions and accompanying template for writing an appropriate and ethically sound
document. Additional assistance is available from tile ORA and/or by reviewing the CFR.
The consent document should be written so a middle school aged child can understand its content
and purpose. H shoul<l im;lude infonnaUun so w1 infonned decision can be rnadt: about whvi.lu:r or
not to participate in the research study. To the greatest extent possible, it should be written in
non-technical, non-scientific, simple language regardless of how long and complex the study.
Below are tools· and recommendations to assist researchers in writing an appropriate consent
document.

Please Note:
•

The consent docnrnent should be in a 12-point font. For subjects with difficultly in
reading, larger font is appropriate.

•

Include page numbers in the follo-\ving format: "Page_ _of _ _"

•

For subjects who cannot read, the docnment must be read to them.

•

Include an appropriate heading; see template .

UNIVERSITY0FPENNSYLVANIA • OFFICE0FREGULAT0RYAFFAIRS

133 South 36th Street, Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246
Socilit-& Behavioral Sciences·

Dran Template for Writing an Informed Consent Document

Tide ofthe Research Study:
Protocol Number:
Principal Investigator: (name, address, phone and email)
Co-investigator: (name, address, phone and email)
:~,~~(n~~~demail)

•. ~'5
•

•

~;.\a·

'•, , ', , -

y-onmebeingaskedto~_~tiuareseareh.-stttdy. ~&.is-neta~1:11ofn~~ll~ therapy. It.
deteGt-~a.~--0r-Aiin.d-so~Tet".g. ... our pa.-rtictpati:'1: 1s voluntz)j
~ /> 0¥ which mtmas you can choose whether on not to participate.
decide mgmttupate 01 not to
: . , <-:J.£. .:. . ~ ¢ti ~~ate l:h.e:r~ Yl'ill no loss of 1'enetits to •.
}ElB 8" ~ s e ~,Bef~e yau m ~
{.dec1-s1~:wili-needJ;a··ko:owthe-~the-stu-d.y, the possible, mks and-benefits ofbemg
--~' · ·._, -- in"llie ~tudy and what you will ha~e ~o do if d , : ~ · "Fae Hseai:ek team- is go.in:g to \ ~~
•'if( talk w¢t,.y@u....aoom-.fhe-.¥y;:.am1~s cons~ent .to read.
~ I>.. ~
• ,,.. ,
.
meksa:=a-e-c:i,io? now; y.ou GaR: talte Hie o6ment deeument .heme ftftd share it d ~ ;;;~; ~ ; ' ~1 ~ ::_:.f\·
ci9~01" aod fonuly.
_J
a.. Ana.~
.
\(\<We 0-_.n-; '1...u~5n:tiflSJ
_
_
.
.
_.
-·
~-_
~~
.• ·
Ifyo~ eoA~ ~~ 81'8 ~ad1ng, d.o DOl-SJgn.rt..PJe~~ ~ ~!fleHsomdier to e~lain
\}: ~
_
•
anything ~ 0 ~ - -d, mcludin-g-an,y. language G041m1tiMl :lft "Im& ~ If you decide to
C\'i(~
•
particip~e11, yfinoudwill bect~;d toati~gn thids form and a copy~ baboe
givtenthtostuyodyw~~ this
in
\N.c,\~\ Y
·
'
1t
you
~
conta
mi.orm
~
an
answers
to
questions
u
e
.'
:,;tl
fflff)I a
In
\" ().,~"'' ,
•
.:
havetlusfonu1eadtuyUU.1't?fiQU1Rt?D)
~
~~~~S~

~

S

J

./ 1s 1:1-ot supposeJ"ia

,meh

~~,. sY

flf-yua

r

d·

==::;h=~r_

V

,j}'v

fon;;

.,

•·•
•.•·
•·•
•·
.,•.,

'P

What is the purpose of the study? (P.EQUH~.JJD)
The purpose of the study is to learn more about

•

\

Ill:,

.:.i
•'.•

.i
.:i
• :i

•

Fill in the space with a simple, accurate explanation ofthe purpose and what specific
condition or conditions tire under study.
If the study is being conducted for a thesis or dissertation, it should be mentioned in here.

Why were you asked to participate in the study? (REQUIRED)

You are being asked to join this study because
..

·-·-.·-..... ..

•

Explain andjustify why the subject is appropriate for re-cruitment. Merely saying that the
possible subject is being invited to participate because he or she meets the requirements
for participation is not ·enough. You should state what are those requirements to clearly
illustrate why him/her, and not somebody else, is being asked to participate.

How long will you be in the study? {REQUJR.ED) How many other people will be in the
study? (REQUIRED ONLY IF APPROPRIATE)

....

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA ♦ OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

133 South 36th Street, Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246
Social & Behavioral Saienees

~

O

Tue study will take place over a period of
years. Tii.is means for the next
months we
days a month participating in this study. Each session will last

will ask you to spend
approximately
You will be one

••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
•
''
'•
•'
''
••
••
••
I

•

,.:;>

~ ~ ~\) (f('\\(\ \

of~(\\) people in the study.

Explain how much time the subject will need to commi(Jn terms ofhours, days, weeks,
months and years.
,

Where will the study take place? (RE~D)

You will be asked !o come ! o # , localed al
•

\1,'y\( ~\ \\m\l
(!fl"
&"rf!" ~

~on ;,{)

al

pm o ~

Explain where the subject will have to go to participate. Be specific about requirements
to go to different sites fer different aspects ofthe study such as testing, meetings and
alike.

What will you be asked to do? (REQUIRED)

•

Provide a chronology ({[what the subject will need to do in a simple, non-technical
language. Ifmultiple visits are required, explain where the subject will need to go for
each visit and what will happen at each visit. Bullets points are acceptable and
encouraged. Remember to clearly identtfj,1 any experimental procedures.

What are the risks? (REQUIRED)
(I'he document should clearly state all possible risks regardless ofseverity. ft should alvo state
what measures have been impiemented within the study design to minimize the possibiiity of
occurrence ofsuch risks. While writing the protocol, PI should be creative when determining all
possible risks. For example, mentioning the risk ofa breach in confidentiality may not be enough,
uniess the document states what such a breach could entail (e.g. public embarrassment,
stigmatization, loss of employment, etc).)

How will you benefit from the study? (REQUIRED)
There is no benefit to you. However., your participation could help us understand
can benefit you inditectly. In the future, this may help other people to

, which

(The consent document is most concern with benefits to the indtvidual, and the presence or
absence ofsuch should precede benefits to the community, society, etc).
What other {:hokes do yeu hav~? (REQUIRED)
Your alternative to being in the study is to not be in the study .

UNIVERSITY OF PENNsYLVANIA • OFF1CE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

133 South 3(/h Street, Mezzanine Levei Philadel,phia, PA 19104-3246
Soc'.al & llehavioral Sciences

If you choose uot to be iu the study the following am other treatmtm.t choices that you may want
to consider.

•

••
••
•

••
••
••
,.•
••

:.•
••
:•

••
•••
•••
•
•••
•.•
:9

II

;

If this applies, provide ihe pertinent information such as a contact name, phone number
and address.

What happens if you do not choose to join the research study? (REQUIRED)
You may choose to join the study or you may choose not to join the study. Your participation is
voluntaty.

There is no penalty if you choose not to join the researcll study. You will loose no benefits or
advantages that are now coming to you, or would come to you in the future. Your therapist, social
worker, nurse, doctor or
will not be upset with your decision .
If you are currently receiving services and you choose not to volunteer in the research study, your
services will continue.

•

Simply and directly tell the subject there are no negative consequences should they
choose not to participate. The purpose is to mitigate any feelings ofobligation or
coercion on the part ofthe subject.

When is the study over? Can I !eave the study before it ends? {FEQULRRD)
The study is expected to end after all participants have completed all visits and all the information
has been collected. The study may be stopped without your consent for the fol!owirig reasons:
The PI feels it is best for your safety and/or health-you will be informed of the
n:asous why.
o You have not followed the study instructions
o The PI, the sponsor or the Office of Regulatory Affairs at the University of
Pennsylvania can stop the study anytime
(REQUIRED ONLY WHEN APPROPRIATE)
o

You have the right to drop out of in the research study anytime during the study.
There is no penalty or loss of benefits if you do so. (REQUIRED)
If you no longer wish to be in the research study. please contact
following steps:

•

• at

and take the

Describe how subjects can withdraw from the study and explain the consequences, ifany,
for doing so (for example, medical or emotional related consequences, if anY,) .

How will confidentiality be maintained and your privacy be protected? {REQUIRED)

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA • OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

133 South 36'1' Street, Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246
Social & Behawond Sciences
Tne fesearch team will 1nake eve1y effort to koop all the infonnatiou you tell us during the study
strictly confidential, as required by law. The Institutional Review Board (!RB) at the University
of Pennsylvania is responsible for protecting the rights and welfare of research volunteers like
you. The IRB has access to ,iudy information. Any docl!IIlents you sign, where you can be
identified by name will be kept in a locked drawer in[U\\\\'#,9ffice. These documents will be kept
confidential. All the docnrnents will be destroyed when the study is over.

•

Explain how confidentiality will be maintained. Be specific about how records will be
secured to protect the identity of the subject. .· State the
at the University of
Pennsylvania will have acces~J{)_ll,e reC()!JiS- Explain.how subJects will be de-identijied,:·wi/l code numbers be used? .Please note; the content of this section will vary according to
the research design. There may be cause for more or less protections depending on the

1RB

nature ofthe research. The language suggested above should be altered when necessary,.
•

Note: For studies utilizing private health information, follow HIPAA guidelines. If the
research is sensitive in nature, a Certificate of Confidentiality may be warranted. An
example may include interviews with prison inmates or juvenile offenders attending a
community re-entry program where information obtained from the subject may
necessitate extra protection. The need for the Certificate should be determined on a case
basis.

What happens if you are injured from being in the stody? (REQTHRED ONLY IF STUDY
INVOLVES MORE THAN MINIMAL RISK, BUT SOMETIMES APPLICABLE TO LOW RISK
STUDIES TOO)

If you are injured and/or feel upset and emotional discomfort while participating in the study you
may contact the PI or the emergency contact name on the first page of this form. Also, you may
contact your own doctor, counselor or seek treatment outside of the University of Penngylvania.
Bring this docnrnent, and tell your doctor/counselor or his/her staff that you are in a research
study being conducted at the University of Pennsylvania. Ask them to call the nnrnbers on the
first page of this form for information.
If you are injured and/or feel emotional discomfort from being in the study, the appropriate care
will be provided wit.401.>t oost to you, bat financ.ial compensation is not otherwise available front
the University of Pennsylvania. If you are injured and/or feel emotional discomfort while in the
study but it is not related to the study, you and your insurance company will be responsible for
!he;, cusls uf ihal cam.

• Ifinjury occurs explain what, if any,

compensation and medical treatments are available.
Describe the treatments and compensation and where information can be obtained.

Will you have to pay for anything? (REQUIRED ONLY WHEN APPROPRIATE)
•

NU

Explain the how much it will cost to participate in the study (how much, to whom and
why) or state that there are no costs associated with participating in the study.

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA.• OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

133 South. 3(jh Street, Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246

Social & Belu:wwral Sciences
•

I•
•:.•
••
:.•
•.•
.,
9

!9
'81

,

.,

lnclude the c:osis w,·sociated with transportation lo and from ihe study ~•iie, parking, lunch

and other related expenses. State what study related expenses are reimbursed.
Will I be compensated for participating in the study? (REQUIRED ONLY WHEN
APPROPRIATE)

To show our appreciation for your time, we will give you
the study before the study is over, your compensation

. If you decide to withdraw from

(J'he consent document should discuss whether fall, partial, or no compensation will be provided
to those who opt to withdraw before the culmination ofthe study).
Wbo do you
..

~~~,ta~!.~f)'Oll have questions abou~~;;~]REQUIRED)
..............
. ~··-····

... -· ..

·····

··············~•--'-~

···,

,.;;._~-,....:..:.....-..;.,.:,..:~"'~--

If you have questions about your rights and welfare as a volunteer in the research study please
contact the Office of Regulatory Affairs at the University of Pennsylvania at 215-898-2614
and/or the PI named on the first page of this document.
Who do you contact if you have questions about the study? (REQillRED)

If you have questions about the research study please contact the PI named on the first page of
this document or any of the other persons identified.

9:

ei

When you sign this document, you are agreeing to take part in this research study. If you
have.any questions or there.is something you 4o not unders~ please ask. You will
receive a copy of this consent document.

9,

•·

Signature of Subject

lit

Date

9,

'.,

Print Name of Subject

:(11

·9,1
91
91

,,.,

,,.,

,~

I)

.•
,

Ao?{ f\111 i ~

. . {i;ji

~

u_

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSY,LVANIA

♦

"J"

OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

:-!_ _ _ __ _ _ _ _ _ _1..:. 3..:..
3_S..:..o_u_th_3_f1_1_' _
S..:..
tr_ee..:..t:c...,_M_e_z_za_n_in_e_Le_v_e_;J,_P
_h_il_a_d_el..:...p_h_
ia-',--_P_A_1_9_10_4_-_
32_4_6_ _ __ __ _ _ _ __

~·

APPENDIX

\

C:

SUBPART

C DOCUMENTATION:
Pl :

RESEARCH INVOLVING PRISONERS*

Protocol#

---

completed by Primary Reviewer or Chair:
• Check the appropriate box for each part as it relates to the proposed research . When shaded box is checked, provide justification as
to how the proposed research meets the criteria for that part and_J/9.Jo nex!_,eart.,
• Prisoners * may be involved in research if all of the following conditions ~ J's ,~~ ; •t»lfjl are met:
o
* §46.303(c): "Prisoner" means any individual involuntarily confined or detained in a penal institution. The term is
intended to encompass individuals sentenced to such an institution under a criminal or civil statute, individuals
detained in other facilities by virtue of statutes or commitment procedures which provide alternatives to criminal
prosecution or incarceration in a penal institution, and individuals detained pending arraignment, trial, or sentencing.

The research under review represents one of the categories of research permissible under §46.306(a)(2):

D

[§46.305(a)(1)]

None of the permissible categories, A-D, applies to the proposed research
STOP! §46.305 NOT met.

►

9 ·(2) Risk/Benefit ratio:
9

lt

Any possible advantages accruing to the prisoner through his or her participation in the research, when compared
to the general living conditions, medical care, quality of food, amenities and opportunity for earnings in the prison, are not of such a
magnitude that his or her ability to weigh the risks of the research against the value of such advantages in the limited choice environment
of the prison is impaired.
[§46.305(a)(2)]

ll D No ► STOP! §46.305 NOT met.
-~ ijr:,:;i
;tL ~ :

II (3) Commensurate risk:
fl
volunteers.

The risks involved in the research are commensurate with risks that would be accepted by non-prisoner
(§46.305(a)(3)]

9 ,.,,-□ ~o ► ,STOP!
9 li ll!i1c
8 (4) Subject & control selection: Procedures for the selection of subjects within the prison are fair to all prisoners and immune from
arbitrary intervention by prison authorities or prisoners. Unless the principal investigator provides to the Board justification in writing
8
for following some other procedures, control subjects must be selected randomly from the group of available prisoners who meet the
a

~

8
•

*

characteristics needed for that particular research project. The risks involved in the resear-ch are commensurate with risks that
would be accepted by non-prisoner volunteers .
(§46.305(a)(4)]

.
Page 1 of 2

~

Appendi x C: Prisoners

Version: 17 Feb 2005

•

•

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA

♦

OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS

·· .'f/ ---'-------------------------------------------133 Sout/7 36"' Street. Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246
The information is presented in language which is understandable to the subject population.

[§46.305(a)(5)]

xists that parole boards will not take into account a prisoner's participation in the research in
, and each prisoner is clearly informed in advance that participation in the research will have no
[§46.305(a)(6)]

ds there may be a need for follow-up examination or care of participants after the end of their
en made for such examination or care, taking into account the varying lengths of individual
participants oft · fact.
[§46.305(a}(7)]

••
.•••'------------------------------------'
:.•
Additional comments:

REVIEWED BY: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _DATE: _ _ _ _ _ _ __

;.:.
•:.•
:.
:9

:•••
••
••
••
••
••

....
Appendix C: Prisoners

Version: 17 Feb 2005

-••·

••
••·
••
J•
••
,.:•
i•
:.••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
•

University of Pennsylvania
Office ofRegulatory Affairs
Joseph R. Sherwin, Ph.D, Director
133 S. 36m Street, Mezzanine Level
Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246
Ph: 215-898-2614/ Fax: 215-573-9438
INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD
(Federalwide Assurance# 00004028)
11/21/2005

PAULA W SABLOFF
UNIVERSITY MUSEUM
3260 SOUTH ST
PIDLADELPHIA, PA 191046324
FAX: 215-898-0657
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR
TITLE
SPONSORING AGENCY
PROTOCOL#
REVIEW BOARD

: PAULA W SABLOFF
: Incarceration as a Possible Mechanism for Change in Identity [SPI: Alison
Peters}
:NO SPONSOR NUMBER
:804082
:IRB #8

! •.

.

-

9

9

:.

Dear DR PAULA SABLOFF:
The above referenced protocol and any applicable consent form(s), HIPAA authorization, recruitment materials and/or
supporting documents were reviewed and approved by the Executive Chair (or her authorized designee) using the
expedited procedure set forth in 45 CFR 46.110, category 7, on 11/3/2005. This study will be due for continuing review
on or before 11/20/2006.
Approval by the IRB does not necessarily constitute authorization to initiate the conduct of a hwnan subject research
study. Principal investigators are responsible for assw:ing final approval from other applicable school, department,
center or institute review committee(s) or boards has been obtained. This includes, but is not limited to, the University
of Pennsylvania Cancer Center Clinical Trials Scientific Review and Monitoring Committee (CTSRMC), General
Clinical Research Center (GCRC) review committee, CAMRIS committee, Institutional Bio-safety Committee (IBC}, .
Environmental Health and Radiation Safety Committee (EHRS), and Standing Conflict of Interest (COI) Committee.
Principal investigators are also responsible for assuring final approval has been obtained from the FDA as applicable,
and/or a valid contract has been signed between the sponsor and the Trustees of the University of Pennsylvania. If any
of these committees require changes to the IRB~approved protocol and/or informed consent/assent document(s); the
changes must be submitted to and approved by the IRB prior to beginning the research study,
The IRB operates in compliance with GCP and applicable laws and regulations.
PLEASE NOTE THE FOLLOWING REQUIREMENTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
Adverse Events: You are required to notify the Office of Regulatory Affairs, if during this study, any adverse events or
unanticipated problems arise that pose a risk to subjects, or others involved in the study. Serious and expected adverse
events that are probably or definitely related must be reported within five days, serious and unexpected adverse
events that are probably or definitely related must be reported within 24-hours, by using PennAEs online
reporting at http://www.upenn.edu/regulatoryaffairs/human/AdverseEvents.htmL For serious problems, approval may
be suspended pending further IRB committee review .
Changes and Amendments: The principal investigator must keep the IRB informed of any changes in the protocol, its
participating investigators, procedures, recruitment, consent forms, FDA status of investigational agents or devices or
conflicts of interest. Any changes to this protocol must be presented in writing to the Office of Regulatory Affairs .
Changes cannot be initiated until the appropriate IRB approval
been given. ..

has

...

Continuing Review: It is the investigator's responsibility to apply for continuing review of ongoing research at least
annually, or more often if required by the funding agency or the IRB. Forms for continuing review are mailed to
investigators and are available at the ORA website.

.,,

•••
••
•.•

Completion of Study: Please notify the Office of Regulatory Affairs as soon as the research has been completed.
If you have any questions about the information in this letter, please contact the Regulatory Affairs administrative staff.

Contact information is available at our website: http://www.upenn.edu/regulatoryaffairs/Contact.html.
Thank you for your cooperation with the Office of Regulatory Affairs.

Sincerely,

.•.:,

Uwttj ll;r---

::

IRB Administrator

;

••••
.

.

.

y

•

;.,

••
:•i
··::

•....

,

.-

:•·.,
:

:9

.l:..•
••.
..•·

;

,

••
•./
••
•
•

i

Categories of Research That May Be Reviewed by the Institntional Review Board (IRB) through
an Expedited Review Procedure1

Applicabilitv
{A) Research activities that (1) present no more than minimal risk to human subjects, and (2) involve only procedures listed in one or
more of the following categories, may be reviewed by the !RB through the expedited review procedure authorized by 45 CFR 46.110
and 21 CFR 56.110. The activities listed should not be deemed to be of minimal risk simply because they are included on this list
Inclusion on this list merely means that the activity is eligible for review through the expedited review procedure when the specific
circumstances of the proposed research involve no more than minimal risk to human subjects.
(B) The categories in this list apply regardless oftqe age of subjects, except as noted.

{C) The expedited review procedure may not be used where identification of the subjects and/or their responses would reasonably
place them at risk of criminal or civil liability or be damaging to the subjects= financial standing, employability, insurability,

reputation, or be stigmatizing, unless reasonable and appropriate protections will be implemented so that risks related to invasion of
privacy and breach of confidentiality are no greater than minimal.
(D) The expedited review procedure may not be used for classified research involving human subjects.
(E) IRBs are reminded that the standard requirements for informed consent (or its waiver, alteration, or exception) apply regardless of

the type ofreview--expedited or convened--utilized by the !RB .
(F) Categories one ( 1) through seven (7) pertain to both initial and continuing IRB review .

Research Categories
(1) Clinical studies of drugs and medical devices only when condition (a) or (b) is met:
(a) Research on drugs for which an investigational new drug application (21 CFR Part 312) is not required. (Note: Research on
marketed drugs .that significantly increases the risks or decreases the acceptability of the risks associated with the use of the
product is not eligible for expedited review.) ·
(b) Research on medical devices for which (i) an investigational device exemption application (21 CFR Part 8 i2) is not required;
or (ii) the medical device is cleared/approved for marketing and the medical device is being used in accordance with its
cleared/approved labeling.
(2) Collection of blood samples by linger stick, heel stick, ear stick, or venipuncture as follows:
(a) from healthy, nonpregnant adults who weigh at least 110 pounds. For these subjects, the amounts drawn may not exceed 550 ml

in an 8 week period and collection may not occur more frequently than 2 times per week; or
(b) from other adults and children2, considering the age, weight, and health of the subjects, the collection procedure, the amount of
blood to be collected, and the frequency with which it will be collected. For these subjects, the amount drawn may not exceed the
lesser of 50 ml or 3 ml per kg in an 8 week period and collection may not occur more frequently than 2 times per week.

••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••..

(3) Prospective collection of biological specimens for research purposes by noninvasive means.
Examples: (a) hair and nail clippings in a nondisfiguring manner; (b) deciduous teeth at time of exfoliation or if routine patient care
indicates a need for extraction; (c) permanent teeth if routine patient care indicates a need for extraction; (d) excreta and external
secretions (including sweat); (e) uncannulated saliva collected either in an unstimulated fashion or stimulated by chewing gumbase
or wax or by applying a dilute citric solution to the tongue; (f) placenta removed at delivery; (g) amniotic fluid obtained at the time
of rupture of the membrane prior to or during labor; (h) supra- and subgingival dental plaque and calculus, provided the collection
procedure is not more invasive than routine prophylactic scaling of the teeth and the process is accomplished in accordance with
accepted prophylactic techniques; (i) mucosa! and skin cells collected by buccal scraping or swab, skin swab, or mouth washings;
G) sputum collected after saline mist nebulization .
(4) Collection of data through noninvasive procedures (not involving general anesthesia or sedation) routinely employed in
clinical practice, excluding procedures involving x-rays or microwaves. Where medical devices are employed, they must be
cleared/approved for marketing. (Studies intended to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the medical device are not
generally eligible for expedited review, including studies of cleared medical devices for new indications.)
Examples: (a) physical sensors that are applied either to the surface of the body or at a distance and do not involve input of
significant amounts of energy into the subject or an invasion of the subject=s privacy; (b) weighing or testing sensory acuity; (c)
magnetic resonance imaging; (d) electrocardiography, electroencephalography, thennography, detection of naturally occurring
radioactivity, electroretinography, ultrasound, diagnostic infrared imaging, doppler blood flow, and echocardiography; (e)
moderate exercise, muscular strength testing, body composition assessment, and flexibility testing where appropriate given the age,
weight, and health of the individual .
(5) Research involving materials (data, documents, records, or specimens) that have been collected, or will be collected solely
for nonresearch purposes (such as medical treatment or diagnosis). (NOTE: Some research in this category may be exempt
from the HHS regulations for the protection of human subjects. 45 CFR 46.10l(b)(4). This listing refers only to research that is not
exempt.)
(6) Collection of data from voice, video, digital, or image recordings made for research purposes .
(7) Research on individual or group characteristics or behavior (including, but not limited to, research on perception,
cognition, motivation, identity, language, communication, cultural beliefs or practices, and social behavior) or research
employing survey, interview, oral history, focus group, program evaluation, human factors evaluation, or quality assurance
methodologies. (NOTE: Some research in this category may be exempt from the HHS regulations for the protection of human
subjects. 45 CFR 46.10l(b)(2) and (b)(3). This listing refers only to research that is not exempt.)
(8) Continuing review of research previously approved by the convened IRB as follows:
(a) where (i) the research is permanently closed to the enrollment of new subjects; (ii) all subjects have completed all researchrelated interventions; and (iii) the research remains active only for long-term follow-up of subjects; .2!
(b) where no subjects have been enrolled and no additional risks have been identified; .Q!
(c) where the remaining research activities are limited to data analysis .
(9) Continuing review of research, not conducted under an investigational new drug application or investigational device
exemption where categories two (2) through eight (8) do not apply but the IRB has determined and documented at a
convened meeting that the research involves no greater than minimal risk and no additional risks have been identified .

1> An expedited review procedure consists of a review of research involving human subjects by the IRB chairperson or by one or
more experienced reviewers designated by the chairperson from among members of the IRB in accordance with the requirements set
forth in 45 CFR 46.110 .
2> Children are defined in the HHS regulations as "persons who have not attained the legal age for consent to treatments or
procedures involved in the research, under the applicable law of the jurisdiction in which the research will be conducted." 45 CFR
46.402(a) .
Source: 63 FR 60364-60367, November 9, 1998 .

•

1 Document Name: untitled

A£~nch~
L
-~--.......C.....----~~-------------

NEW JERSEY COUNTY CORRECTION INFORMATION SYSTEM
12/09/05
DAILY COUNT AS OF: 12 09 2005
9:35
OlJNTY CODE: 04 - CAMDEN
LOCATION:
00 (00 = ALL LOCATIONS)'
·--- -- - -SUMMARY /CUSTODY STATUS- - ---- - - - - - - - - - --- -- -DEMOGRAPHICS- - -- - - - . ~ - - - -- - - -·.· CATEGORY
TOTAL MALES FEMALES I CATEGORY
TOTAL MAL~S FEMALES
,·

-------~--------------~----------~------------------~------------------------~TED CAPACITY
.OPULATION
.ERCENTAGE

1015
2178
215

932
1964
211

83
214
258

-emsENTENCED
•
PRETRIAL
• PRESENTENCED

1218
1041
177

1130
962
168

88
79

.ENTENCED
• COUNTY SENT.
• WEEKENDERS
ST.PRISONERS
• CONTRACT

614
427
4
183
0

532
354
2
176
0

82
73

llfTHER
..,OT ENTERED

335
11

293
9

42

•
•.•
•.•
•
:••
;.,•·
••
••
••
••
••

9

A ASIAN/PACIF ISL
6
1239'
B BLACK
H HISPANIC
462
I AM.IND/ALASKA NT
2
U UNKNOWN
i
W WHITE
466
Z OTHER
1
NOT ENTERED
1
UNDER 18

4

2

1121
434
1
1
401
1
1

118
28

3

3

0

87
13

498
503
535
338
77
10

28
57
73
43
10

2
7
0

2

41 - so
51 - 60
OVER 60

1
0

65
0
0

3

STRIKE ENTER - TO OBTAIN ACTIVE POPULATION BREAKDOWN

,

,

..

---------------------------------

. t e : 12/9/2005 Time: 9:3Q.:•,i°2 AM

•

1 Document Name: untitled

NEW JERSEY COUNTY CORRECTI
12/09/05
DAILY COUNT AS OF
9:39
, _oUNTY CODE : 0 4 - CAMDEN
I ON:
0 0 ( 0 0 = ALL LOCATIONS)
/-------SUMMARY/CUSTODY STATUS---------------------DEMOGRAPHICS----------------- _CATEGORY
TOTAL MALES FEMALES I CATEGORY
TOTAL MALES FEMALES

------------------~--

~~--------------------------------------------------

TED CAPACITY
iillr:OPULATION
- PERCENTAGE

1015
2079
205

932
1865
200

83
214
258

~SENTENCED
•
PRETRIAL
•
PRESENTENCED

1188
1088
100

1085
995
90

103
93
10

502
381
2
119

422
310
1
111

80
71
1
8
0

•

I
I
I
I
I
I
I

20
1059
409
1
0
374
0
2

12
101
26
1
0
74
0
0

4
UNDER 18
4
18 - 23
513
483
24 - 30
502
459
31 - 40
0
603
522
371
41 - 50
319
337
30
51 - 60
76
68
1
21
10
10
I OVER 60
ENTER - TO OBTAIN ACTIVE POPULATION BREAKDOWN

0
30
43
81
52
8
0

1-

""3ENTENCED
•
•
•

•

;.

COUNTY SENT.
WEEKENDERS
ST.PRISONERS
CONTRACT

lllllfTHER

,.OT ENTERED

0

367
22
STRIKE

A ASIAN/PACIF ISL
32
B BLACK
1160
H HISPANIC
435
I AM. IND/ALASKA NT
2
U UNKNOWN
0
W WHITE
448
Z OTHER
0
NOT ENTERED
2

I
I
I
I
I
I
I

:•

••
•
:•
•....

•.,.
.
_

:•

••
••..
••..

..

·------=--------------------------•

t e: 12/9/2005 Time: 9:34:03 AM

....

1 Document Name: untitled
NEW JERSEY COUNTY CORRECTION INFORMATION SYSTEM
ACTIVE INMATE POPULATION

. ·"COUNTY

J,.•1,ANTIC

,~~:GTON
.. CAMDEN.
•~APE MAY
-==UMBERLAND
lllltSSEX

GLOUCESTER
.dUDSON
.UNTERDON
.,ERCER

:•••
••
••
••
•••
•••
••
•..
•..
••
••
•
•

ACTIVE

SSP

TOTAL

1212
11
543
1960
224
695
2638
330
2081
98
861

179

1391
11
543
2179
257
738
2705
330
2081
99
861

0

0
219
33
43
67
0
0
1
0

COUNTY
MIDDLESEX
MONMOUTH
MORRIS
OCEAN
PASSAIC
SALEM
SOMERSET
SUSSEX
UNION
WARREN

ACTIVE

SSP

TOTAL

1175
1268
325
488
2793
279
290
138
1150
158

0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1175
1268
325
488
2793
279
290
138
1150
158

TOTAL NUMBER OF ACTIVE INMATES
TOTAL NUMBER OF SPECIAL SENTENCE

18717
542

GRAND TOTAL INMATE POPULATION

19259

-._te: 12/9/2005 Time: 9:34:50 AM

12/09/05
9:40

0

Bibliography

.•

••
••
•.,•
.•
.•
.,•
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••

Adler F., Mueller G.O.W., & Laufer, W. (editors). (2004). Criminology and the Criminal
Justice System. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Aijmer, Goran and Abbink, Jon. (2000). Meaning of Violence: A Cross Cultural
Perspective. New York: Berg.
Barnard, Alan and Spencer, Jonathan, ed~. (1996). Encyclopedia of Social and Cultural
Anthropology. New York: Routledge .
Bernard, Russell H. (1988). Research Methods in Cultural Anthropology. Newbury Park
CA: Sage Publications .

,

,

•

Breakwell, Glynis. (I 986). Coping with Threatened Identities. New York: Methuen .
Cohen, Anthony P. (2000). Signifying Identities: Anthropological Perspectives on
Boundaries and Contested Values. New York: Routledge .
Davies, Malcolm. (1993). Punishing Criminals: Developing Community-Based
Intermediate Sanctions. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press .
Dundes, Alan. (1989). Folklore Matters. Knoxville, TN: University of Tennessee Press .
Edgar, Andrew and Sedgwick, Peter. (2002). Cultural Theory: The Key Concepts. New
York: Routledge Taylor and Francis Group .
Editorial Desk. (2005, September 20). "The Crime and the Time". [Editorial]. The New
York Times, Section A, Page 28 .
Erikson, Erik. (I 968). Identity Youth and Crisis. New York: Norton .
Foley, Douglas E. (1990). Learning Capitalist Culture: Deep in the Heart ofTejas .
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press .
Foucault, Michel. ( 1977). Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison (Alan Sheridan,
Trans). New York: Vintage Books .
Hallowell, A. Irving. ( 1955). The Self and Its Behavioral Environment. New York:
Schocken Books .
Hubert, Jane [ ed]. (2000). Madness, Disability and Social Exclusion: The Archeology
and Anthropology of "Difference". New York: Routledge .

,

••
••
••
••
•.•·
•.•
.,••·
.••·
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
•
,

;

,

I

Hubner, John. (2005). Last Chance in Texas: The Redemption of Criminal Youth. New
York: Random House.
James, William. ( 1925). The Philosophy of William James. New York: Modem Library
Levinson, David and Ember, Melvin. (1996). Encyclopedia o/Cultural Anthropology .
New York: Henry Holt and Company.
Linde, Charlotte. (1993).Life Stories: The Creation qfCoherence. New York: Oxford
University Press .
Pattillo, Mary; Weiman, David and Western, Bruce [eds]. (2004). Jmprisoning America:
The Social Effects of Mass Incarceration. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Robbins, Richard H. (2006). Cultural Anthropology: A Problem Based Approach, 4 th
Edition. Plattsburg, NY: Thomson Wadsworth .
Saforstein, Richard, (2004) Criminalistics: An Introduction to Forensic Science. Prentice
Hall, NJ .
Simpson, Colton and Pearlman, Anne. (2905). Inside the Crips: Lffe Inside LA 's Most
Notorious Gang. New York: St. Martin's Press .
Swartz, David. ( 1997). Culture and Power: The Sociology ofPierre Bourdieu. Chicago:
Chicago University Press .
Virgil, James Diego. (2002). A Rainbow of Gangs: Street Cultures in the Mega-City.
Austin: University of Texas Press .
Winthrop, Robert H. (1991). Dictionary o/Concepts in Cultural Anthropology. Westport,
CT: Greenwood Press .

From the World Wide Web:
Camden Resource Guide
http://www.camdenresources.org/demographics.html
Federal Bureau of Prisons Webpage
http://www.bop.gov

.,..

Home Town Locator for Camden, New Jersey
http://www.hometownlocator.com/PlaceDetail.cfm?SCFIPS=34007&City=Camden

I

••
••
••
••
.••
•i.•
I.

Mental Health Association in New Jersey
http://www.mhanj.org/fact sheet higher investigation.htrn
National Institute of Corrections Webpage
http://nici.org/webpage 378.htm
United States Census Bureau
http://quickfacts.census.gov/gfd/states/34/3410000.html

:'

!.!.
.

, .-

••
••
••
••
••
•..•

e

,...

