Anthropology Senior Theses

University of Pennsylvania

ScholarlyCommons
Department of Anthropology

Winter 2006

Preserving Heritage: Indigenous Rights and Traitional Knowledge
Mariel Murray
University of Pennsylvania

Follow this and additional works at: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses

Q

Part of the Anthropology Commons

Recommended Citation
Murray, Mariel, "Preserving Heritage: Indigenous Rights and Traitional Knowledge" (2006). Anthropology
Senior Theses. Paper 73.

This paper is posted at ScholarlyCommons. https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/73
For more information, please contact repository@pobox.upenn.edu.

Preserving Heritage: Indigenous Rights and Traitional Knowledge
Disciplines
Anthropology

This thesis or dissertation is available at ScholarlyCommons: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/73

Preserving Heritage: Indigenous Rights and
Traditional Knowledge

Mariel Murray
Anthropology Senior Thesis
For Honors
Graduation: December 2006

1

Abstract
Who defines a culture and the boundaries of its heritage, as well as how culture is
remembered and used, can be contentious issues. People within a culture as well as those
surrounding it often have differing views as to where certain traditions stem from and
what sources of history should be consulted. In fact, control over traditional and natural
resources is linked to control over knowledge and, essentially, identity. Indigenous
peoples, a chronically disadvantaged demographic, are currently finding their culture and
traditions threatened by national goverrunents and corporations. This trend is primarily a
legacy of colonialism that is reinforced by international legal instruments, which until
recently traditionally failed to support indigenous peoples in their struggles for
recognition and rights with national goverrunents. This thesis will examine these issues
in the context of a Maya group in Belize and their cultural know ledge regarding
medicinal plants; the government's seizure of rainforest lands seems to protect
biodiversity at the cost of cultural diversity.

An anthropologist doing fieldwork is inevitably working on the ground at a local
level, focusing on trying to make abstract scholarly ideas relevant to the people being
studied. As Joseph Palacio, an anthropologist active in Belize, noted, anthropology
should be used to empower people and encourage development (1976:486). At the same
time, the anthropologist also tries to extrapolate larger issues from the local activities.
Similarly, a lawyer advocating for human rights needs to have a real-world, local practice
to decipher the practical interaction between national legal frameworks and international
human rights law. The disciplines of anthropology and law may seem to be disparate

2

ultimately serving different functions in society; however, these disciplines are often
complementary, especially regarding protecting cultural heritage and promoting human and in particular, indigenous people's -- rights. Both fields have the potential to
empower local people to seize control of their resources and provide avenues for dialogue
(Merry 2006:11). In future endeavors, I expect that both fields will also affect and be
influenced by aspects of indigenous sovereignty, including education and social
responsibility.
Public interest anthropology contributes to these efforts by bringing in discourses
about what defines local people, indigenous people, and ethnicity in general. As Peggy
Sanday describes, Public Interest Anthropology (PIA) complements the role of the
anthropologist conducting fieldwork, as it advocates participatory action research, where
the scholar "acts as both researcher and public advocate, aggressively investigating the
reasons for conflict, presenting their findings to all parties, and participating-when
invited-in consensus building" (Salazar 2004:4). (PIA) primarily focuses on dialogue
within civil society, investigating how groups conflict with other groups in the promotion
of their interests (Salazar 2004:4). For example, those within an ethnic group often
define their boundaries in cultural and historical terms rather than purely physical terms,
and compare their rights and stakes to other groups in relation to these factors.
This investigation is critical, as delineated parameters of what legally (officially)
as well as practically defines a culture profoundly affect how the people of that culture
are treated and preserved. One scholar explained that ethnicity is "an aspect of culture
that is created, challenged and redefined by people even while it constrains them"
(emphasis added) (Bolland 2003: 199). Ethnicity can be constraining as ethnic or cultural

3

categories are usually, legally, defined by a national government, [and thus become
politicized means of legitimizing discriminatory policies?]. In this way, ethnicity can be
interpreted as "chiefly a property of social relations, not of ideology" (May 2004: 93). If
a people become politically marginalized (as has happened to most indigenous peoples),
so will their culture and their knowledge or heritage; only when disenfranchised peoples
participate in national dialogue as equal stakeholders and take control of these discourses
that they may become advocates and take control of their status within their own nations.
Indigenous people belong to a particular category of people that are often
marginalized and prevented from participating in dialogue, as they are actively shut out
by the government or lack the education and resources. Governments often avoid and
disregard the use of the word "indigenous" to minimize the potential claim these people
have to the land. This tactic is part of a larger official governmental strategy of
homogenization of national populations. As one source pointed out, "the state is
inherently uncomfortable with the idea of cultural diversity and it is prone to count and
label citizens; the lesser the number of categories the more comfortable the state is" (May
2004: 121). Moreover, indigenous societies are inherently "based ... on [livelihoods] that
are at odds with the economic and institutional requirements of statehood" (Niezen 2003:
214)
We must therefore attempt to evaluate accepted definitions of the term
indigenous. Andre Betielle, in his article The Idea ofIndigenous People, discusses the
evolution of the use of the word tribal to the word indigenous in anthropological
literature. It seems that designating a population as indigenous is appropriate "when
there are other populations in the same region that reasonably be described as settlers or

4

aliens" (1998: 188). Moreover, the word is used to denote "a particular history of
settlement and usurpation" (l 988:188). He notes, however, that the concept of
indigenous people becomes problematic in certain cases where the original population
has migrated and occupies a wider area than currently than they did prior to colonization
(across national borders, for example) (1988: 190).
The United Nations in 1986 and the International Labor Organization in 1989
defined indigeneity? (the property of being indigenous) in terms of"historic continuity,
distinctiveness, marginalization, self-identity, and self-governance" (Dove 2006:1).
Transition needed here This definition may have been crafted to be deliberately vague so
as not to cause too much controversy among the nation states drafting it. As this
demonstrates, the debate about indigenous peoples needs to be traced historically,
however, as the colonial legacy still affects policy today.
The European colonial powers historically embraced the convenient concept of
terra null is, or "lands without a recognized owner," to lay claim to the territories they

invaded (Williams 1990: 675). This attitude led to the "doctrine of discovery," the
standard set by colonial powers that basically claimed that if they "discovered" land
containing non-western inhabitants, the land was theirs for the taking. The rights of the
indigenous people have thus been impinged upon ever since the colonial powers started
th

to allocate the land into private hands beginning in the 16 century. For example,
currently, out of between 34 million and 40 million people in Latin America, around
eight to ten percent of the population are classified as indigenous, resulting in a
fundamental "disengagement between culture and territory" (Assies 1999:4) and (May
2004:131).

5

The persistence of a nationalist legacy of colonialist prejudice against indigenous
peoples has meant that at present, international law "does not contest unilateral assertions
of state sovereignty that limit, or completely deny the collective cultural rights of
indigenous peoples" (Williams 1990:664). Within the arena of international law,
indigenous rights effectively did not exist until the 1970s, during the decolonization era,
when a pro-indigenous rights movement known as indigenism emerged (Niezen 2003:4).
Although the purely legal "indigenous rights" question in terms of international law is a
relatively recent phenomenon, it did not occur in an a historical vacuum. Even though
the context of indigenism was that of post-colonial societies, it is related to a much older
debate that raged for centuries throughout Western (European) society about whether
natives (indigenous people) were as human as white people, and whether they
were entitled to the same "God-given" or "natural" rights as western man. Indigenous or
customary law was eventually developed to handle "the indigenous right to ... territory
and unrestricted natural resources as interpreted by indigenous groups," (Assies
1999:290).
Within the last few decades, a much wider awareness and more active advocacy
of the right of indigenous people has emerged. Stemming from a movement started by
leaders of indigenous groups in the Americas, an initial declaration on principles for the
defense of indigenous nations was presented at a United Nations (U.N.) conference in
1977. At that time, the U.N. Sub-Commission on the Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities, part of the U.N. Human Rights Commission, created the
Working Group on Indigenous Populations in 1982. The Working Group became a
leading international forum for indigenous peoples' leaders meeting annually in Geneva

6

(Merry 2006:7). As scholar Sally Engle Merry elaborated, in these forums, indigenous
groups sought self-determination under international law, "although they were generally
not seeking statehood or independence but survival of their cultural communities. They
were searching for cultural identity and control over land and other resources rather than
autonomy" (2006:7).
The Draft Declaration on the Rights ofindigenous Peoples was finalized in 1994
after much discussion among indigenous groups and U.N. representatives in the Working
Group on Indigenous Populations, and includes "the right to create and maintain
indigenous peoples' own governments and their own laws and legal systems" (Merry
2006: 7). The Working Groups created a "Draft Declaration on Rights oflndigenous
Peoples," and a "Draft Resolution on the Rights ofindigenous People."
The Draft Declaration on Rights ofindigenous Peoples (Williams 1990:684) emphasizes
four key points:
1) the distinctive nature of indigenous peoples' collective rights
2) the centrality of territorial rights to indigenous survival
3) the recognition of indigenous peoples' rights to self-determining autonomy
4) international legal protection of indigenous rights
The Draft Declaration addresses the issues of territorial and land rights in
particular in requiring "just and fair compensation ... when [indigenous people's] property
has been taken away from them without consent" (Williams 1990:690). The Draft also
requires states to "consult with indigenous peoples ... prior to the commencement of any
'large-scale' mineral and subsurface development project affecting indigenous peoples
and their territories" to mitigate negative effects. Most importantly, "in no case may an

7

indigenous people be deprived of its means of subsistence" (Williams 1990:694). The
Draft has not yet passed officially into the annals of international law, however, as it was
still not adopted by 2006 (Merry 2006:7).
Other statements advocating indigenous rights have begun to emerge within the
last decade, though without legal ramifications . For example, the Rio Summit of 1992
included a call for protection and promotion of the "innovations and practices of
indigenous and local communities embodying traditional lifestyles relevant for the
conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity" (Maffi 2005:7). Also, the
Durban Action Plan, the central outcome of the fifth World Parks Congress, highlights
"the connection between dispossession and poverty, culture change, and social and
subsistence losses on the part of people living in and around protected areas" (West et. al
2006:5). Finally, in a symbolic gesture, the United Nations declared the years 1995 to
2004 to be the "indigenous peoples" decade (Dove 2006:1).
Despite these laudable efforts, many goverrnnents have not been held accountable
for abuses against people of specific ethnicities, including indigenous peoples.
Governments have tended to use ethnic categories to "distribute ... burdens, construct
category-specific institutions, identify particular persons as bearers of [negative]
categorical attributes, 'cultivate' populations, or, at the extreme, 'eradicate' unwanted
'elements"' (May 2004:67). Furthermore, if the goverrnnent retains the power to allocate
rights to certain groups of its choosing, "then group membership is an ascribed status, not
a voluntary choice" and indigenous peoples must compete with other groups for
resources, political power and privilege (May 2004:44).

8

One way for a group to take control of discourse concerning ethnic identity and
make membership in a group a source of pride is through the assertion of cultural history
and knowledge. Embracing ethnohistory, the notion that knowledge and history are
"seen as both part of cultural property and integral to cultural identity," is therefore
essential (Riley 2004: 311 and Palacio 1976: 489). The Convention for the Protection of
Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict, also known as the Hague Convention
of 1954, defined cultural property as "movable or immovable property of great
importance to the culturalheritage of every people." Cultural property and identity can be
seen as part of a people's heritage, which in tum can be both tangible and intangible.
Tangible heritage includes physical objects such as archaeological artifacts or
buildings, works of art, books; in contrast, intangible cultural heritage is more abstract,
encompassing a people's lmowledge and traditions. As one author explained, intangible
heritage is "that which enriches the intellectual, psychological, emotional, spiritual,
cultural and/or creative aspects of human existence and well being" (Mitchell 2001 :4). It
includes music and dances, as well as ethnobotanical knowledge, which is a people's
particular understanding and use of their native flora, also known as traditional ecological
lmowledge or TEK. TEK is "traditional knowledge, innovations, and practices" (Barkan
2003: 209). It also plays an important role in traditional medicine and healing (Barkan
2003: 209).
Much indigenous ]mowledge falls within this latter category of intangible
heritage. Peter Easton, a consultant for the World Bank, defines indigenous knowledge
in two ways:

9

1)

as "a heritage from the past including specific bodies of knowledge in
different areas like botany, medicine, social governance"; and

2)

as "a means of articulating what people know and - for the future - [ a
way of] creating new knowledge"

(Woytek et. al 2004:9)
Whether tangible or intangible, a group's cultural heritage and indigenous
knowledge are deserving of protection and preservation. However, the appropriate
means of achieving this goal is hotly debated in anthropological, political, and legal
circles with each approaching the topic differently. Anthropological and political debates
center on the issue of endangered heritage, particularly in relation to indigenous peoples.
Legal scholars struggle with defining official ways to claim knowledge, as will be
described below.

Indigenous Intellectual Property Rights
Legal debates address the issue of granting indigenous people the right to their
cultural heritage by discussing ways to officially document heritage and ascertain
ownership. The controversy sterns from the fact that no precedent really exists for
protecting intangible knowledge. As one legal scholar observed, intangible cultural
products are "legally invisible" (Scafidi 2005: 125). Part of the reason for this confusion
about rights to ownership is that law usually ensures individual rather than collective
rights; in the western legal tradition, individual ownership is assumed, thus when an
individual gets an idea or invents something, he or she must patent or trademark it under
intellectual property laws (IPR).

10

Intellectual property rights (IPR) is the preferred legal framework for establishing
ownership of knowledge or technology under the western legal system. Through
copyrights, patents, trademarks and trade secrets, IPR gives an inventor or claimant sole
rights to the knowledge for a limited period of time. The main goal of IPR is to ensure
that "information enters the public domain in a timely fashion while allowing creators, be
they individuals or corporate groups, to derive reasonable financial and social benefits
from their work" (Brown, 1998: 196).
Obviously, this system of ownership is problematic for many non-Western
societies and indigenous groups that traditionally inherit collectively. Also, culture is not
a "bounded, static entity" but a process, a conglomerate of traditions and knowledge that
people inherit (Brown 1998: 196). This ambiguity makes culture hard to define, claim,
and own as such. Also, the purpose of IPR mediums such as copyrights and patents is "to
encourage change, not to maintain the traditional" (Greaves 1994: 8). "Finally, patents
and copyrights only give short term protection (Brown 1998: 202).
Several legal instruments have recently been crafted in an attempt to protect
intellectual property, particularly indigenous knowledge. Trade-related intellectual
property rights (TRIPS) established under the GATT agreement seeks to create an
international standard for minimum IPR protection. More specifically, the TRIPS
agreement "allows nations to design sui generis plant protection methods that adopt legal
elements from industrial countries" (Brush 1996: 15). Advocates claim that TRIPS
encourages technology transfer, which is one strategy for equitable benefit sharing also
vague. Importantly, communities view their environment holistically making it difficult
to assign credit for a particular piece of knowledge to just one individual in a community

11

(Woytek et al 2004: 133). Additionally, TRlPS does not grant patentability to plants and
animals other than microorganisms and processes (Woytek et al 2004:134).
The 1998 Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) acknowledged "the value of
indigenous knowledge and resources" for the first time, claiming that "each contracting
party shall, as far as possible and as appropriate ... subject to its national legislation,
respect, preserve and maintain knowledge, innovations, and practices of indigenous and
local communities embodying traditional lifestyles relevant for the conservation and
sustainable use of biological diversity" (Barkan 2003:208). The CBD also provided
means for equitable benefit sharing among parties (Barkan 2003 :209).
The CBD defined biodiversity as "the variability among living organisms from all
sources and the ecological complexes of which they are part; this includes diversity
within species, between species, and of ecosystems" (Nazarea 2006:3). As another
scholar, Wilcox, noted, an alternative definition of biodiversity is "the variety of life
fonns, the ecological roles they perform, and the genetic diversity they contain" (Nazarea
2006:1). Essentially, the CBD granted countries sovereign rights over their resources,
and with the exception of the United States, over 150 countries signed the CBD (Balick et
al 1996:154).
"Plant variety protection" is another type of IPR regarding botanical intellectual
property/knowledge. Plant Variety Protection gives protection/sole use rights for 18
years, and allows farmers to duplicate plants for use as seed or for breeding without
needing to pay royalties (Brush 1993: 654). This type ofIPR is codified by the
International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV).

12

Nevertheless, while IPR is often suggested as the appropriate tool for preserving
indigenous knowledge, given its potential economic benefits particularly, I will argue that
other, more practical and less formal avenues for preserving knowledge, particularly
ethnobotanical knowledge, are more appropriate.

The Maya-A Brief History
A plethora of indigenous peoples have populated Central and South America
throughout its history. The Maya have common origins with a larger indigenous group of
Mesoamerican people. They principally inhabited parts ofYucatan,,the modern states of
Chiapas and Tabasco, Guatemala and Belize, and the western parts of El Salvador and
Honduras (Sharer 2006:23). A recent find in San Bartolo, Guatemala, indicates that the
Maya civilization was established as early as AD 100, and collapsed around AD 800
under mysterious circumstances ([there are] signs of mass abandonment and a possible
hostile takeover by the Mexicans) (Sharer 2006:587). Sharer indicates that the society
probably developed between BC 1000 BC and AD 1500 (2006:79). There are three
Maya groups, the Kechi, Mopan and Yucatan Maya, and over 28 languages (2006:26).
As noted earlier, the indigenous peoples of the New World have been
marginalized ever since the Colonial period, and the Maya have been no exception.
There are many accounts of Spanish and British exploitation and blatant disregard of the
well being of the native peoples. The Spanish invasion of Meso and South America in
the early 16th century did immeasurable damage to the Maya culture and social structure
by uprooting many of the Maya from their traditional homesteads and driving them into
encomiendas, which are economically efficient plots ofland. This distribution ofland

13

allowed colonists to occupy land between native communities, and induced a mass
relocation of Maya from Belize to Guatemala and Honduras, and vice versa .. Currently,
three different Maya groups are scattered throughout MesoAmerica, and subsist mainly
on agriculture and hired labor (Rabinowitz 1986: 36).

The Maya in Belize: Past and Present Political Discrimination
In Maya, Belikin means "land of the road toward the sea" and is] probably the

origin of the name Belize (Bolland 2003: 1). Belize is one of the smallest countries in
Latin America, and the second smallest in Central America, covering a mere 8,867 sq.
miles (Premdas 2001: 2). The Spanish first colonized the area in the l 7'h century, and
were followed by the British who specialized in mahogany exports. Due to the havoc
wreaked by the Spanish encomiendas as described above, by 1697, the Belize Maya "had
melted into small groups living in hamlets or alquilos away from the main roadways
connecting their territory to the Spaniards in Bachalan and in Tayal." (Cal 2004: 19)
Up until the decolonization period (and even afterwards), native tribes have been
denied full title or sovereign rights over their homelands, even though in places like
Belize, between 15% and 20% of the people are indigenous (Assies 1999:4). The current
government claims that the Maya currently residing in Belize emigrated from Guatemala
in the 19th century. While there was a mass migration at that time, most likely some of
the Maya escaped the forced relocation and epidemics and continued to live in southern
th

Belize until they intermarried with the incoming Q'eqchi Maya during the 19 century
(Cal 2004: 18 ). According to one source, the Mopan Maya are the descendants of the
original Maya living in Belize (Rabinowitz 1986: 6).

14

The chronically low status of the modem day Maya in Belize is due in part to the
British legacy (they controlled the area for over one hundred years), as they always
denied the legitimacy of Maya claims to the lands. In fact, the Maya were referred to in
official documents as "immigrants who came after the British" (Barnett 2001 :11).
Elements of the "doctrine of discovery" can be detected in the origin myth propagated by
the British, which states that the indigenous Maya supposedly "deserted the area long
before the arrival of the British, who occupied an uninhabited land" (Bolland: 2003:17).
Yet, as the British sociologist Nigel Bolland describes, when the British moved
inland in search of resources (particularly timber), the Maya had to be forcibly induced to
leave their villages. This displacement deprived them of a means of livelihood and made
them dependent upon their timber employers, as they were simultaneously denied the
right to own land (Bolland 2003: 125). The colonial masters of Belize as well as the
current governments of many of the areas formerly inhabited by the Maya, purposely
gloss over these forced mass relocations in claiming that the Maya are not indigenous.
Point is not clear. In this manner, the colonial power conveniently removed the stigma
attached to "the process of conquest, dispossession and colonization" (Bolland 2003:

I 01).
The British also established a hierarchy of ethnicities placing the Maya at the
bottom of the socioeconomic chain, and it survives to this day. The structure of society is
historically characterized by a concentration ofland and power in the hands of the white
British, the uppermost economic class. They were followed by the Creole landowners
and merchants, and then the Mestizo and landless Creoles. At the bottom were the
landless Maya and Garifuna who were collectively denied the right to own lands under

15

the Crown Lands Ordinance of 1872 and had thus had small reserves created for them.
Paraphrase? (Bolland 2003: 18).
Belize is a nation of mixed ethnicities; according to one source, it has eight
"ethno-cultural" communities, all competing with each other for government attention
and resources (Premdas 2001 :2). In addition to the Maya (whose three subgroups live in
several areas of the country, speaking slightly different dialects of the Mayan language).,
Belizean ethnic groups include the Mestizo, Creole, Garifuna, Chinese, Syrian-Lebanese,
East Indians and Mennonites. This was reflected in the 1991 Census, which used the
following ethnic categories: Creole, East Indian, Chinese, Maya, Garifuna,
White/Caucasian, Mestizo and Other. The Mestizo population is a product of
immigration and refugee flows from Central America. The Creole are descendants of
African slaves brought in by the British. The Garifuna are descendants of Caribs from
the island of St. Vincent who intermarried with African slaves. The Chinese were
originally brought in as indentured agricultural labor for the southern sugar estates about
100 years ago, but a second wave is currently immigrating as entrepreneurs. The East
Indians are principally merchants. Finally, the Mennonites emigrated from Manitoba
(Canada), Chihuahua (Mexico), and Germany in the last century in search of cheap
farmland (Barnett 2001:4 and Premdas 2001:2,8,21).
In Belize, the relationship among ethnic groups and the current government seems

particularly challenging, especially relative to other Central American countries for
several reasons. "GP", a Maya man active in the indigenous movement in Belize,
claimed that although the Maya in Guatemala experienced an ethnocide in the latter part
of the 20 th century, currently, those Maya populations have their own flags and enjoy a

16

certain degree of recognition from the government (GP, personal communication,
5/24/06). Another Maya man observed that the Belizean government is ethnically mostly
Mestizo, whereas in Guatemala many officials are Maya (D, personal communication).

In fact, only one Maya person is a representative in the Belizean government, a Kechi
Maya from the southern Toledo district who seems to focus principally on those living
within his district (OC, personal communication, 5/22/06). Upon further investigation,
this representative is the Hon. Michael Espat, of the Toledo East district and is the
Minister of Works (House).
Naturally, the government has different priorities in handling claims from the
various groups, though it invariably treats the Maya as the lowest priority. The
government does not seem to acknowledge the Maya's indigenous claim to land,
heritage, or resources. Though relatively little conflict is manifested between these ethnic
groups on the local level, evidence exists of a bias on the part of the government against
certain ethnicities, including the indigenous Maya. According to a Garifuna teacher at a
Maya school, the ethnic groups mostly stay separate, with the Garifuna and Maya
working together more because they occupy the two southern districts of Stann Creek and
Toledo, while the Mestizos are in the northern districts of Cayo, Orange Walk and
Corozal. Members of the national government are mostly Mestizo (DO, personal
communication, 5/26/06).
One of the main reasons the government treats the Maya as a low priority and
discredits them is unmistakably due to the fact that the Maya claim to be the true
indigenous inhabitants of Belize. As discussed previously, this claim to indigeneity has
important political implications, since it fundamentally challenges the authority of the

17

state (Assies 1999:285). Expressing his frustration with the government's treatment of
his people, one Mayan man, "GC", said that the state prefers "to do what it can to walk
on us and make us into nothing, as we have a claim as the first [people] here" (GC,
personal commuuication, 5/22/06). The indigenous aspect of the Maya identity is clearly
critical, invoking their "sense of permanence aud their ability to survive and stay close to
their cultures and homelands despite almost insurmountable odds" including the claims to
the land made by the colonial power aud the current state (Niezen 2003 :xii).
As Maya teacher aud advocate "FP" commented, "the government doesn't
recognize communal land ownership or indigenous rights to land," as these challenge the
state's right to the laud, including the subsoil and airspace. Mauy years ago, the Maya
Leaders Alliance -- a group of Maya leaders aud intellectuals that generates debate and
represents indigenous people in negotiations with governments -- apparently filed a
petition with the Inter-American Humau Rights Alliance to force the government to
recognize the Maya people. The Belizean government has yet to address it. The Maya
are among the poorest people in the country, even though "FP" clamed that they often
Jive in areas "with high natural and cultural resources"-auother painful irony for them to
endure (FP, personal communication, 5/29).
National policies encouraging homogenization of the population are prevalent
throughout Latin America; in Belize, the Maya are actively discouraged from embracing
their heritage. This tendency is occurring despite the Belizean government's official
policies of embracing a mixed heritage. Given that national self-image usually "reflects
au ambivalent combination of cosmopolitan modernity aud self-conscious reference to

18

the traditions of the past, most often represented by the icons of indigenousness" the
prejudiced national policy is unwarranted (Postero 2004: 130).
In fact, Maya culture is one of the most important aspects of Belize's national

image, constituting a large part of the tourist attraction to this small Central American
nation. Part of the government's strategy for creating a homogenous Belizean national
heritage involves claiming the archaeological sites of the Mayas as purely national
symbols as opposed to symbols of the indigenous culture. Today, archaeological sites in
Belize open to the public are completely government-run; visitors pay a fee at the gate,
which is usually located right next to gift shops profiting from the legends, history and
culture of the Maya. The government monopoly of site management seems to have
occurred at least partially under the pretext that the Maya could not comprehend the
artistic-cultural merit of archaeological items. Additionally, many tourists visit Belize as
eco-tourists-they venture into the rainforest (now national sanctuaries) where many of
today's Maya population used to live.
As noted earlier, definitions and parameters of ethnic groups are often hard to
characterize. In many situations, national governments attempt to define and recognize
certain groups, but not others. In response to this trend in Belize, the Maya have begun to
engage in a process of ethnic revivalism and even ethnogenesis, or "the attempt by each
community to write its own experiential narratives and record its historical memory." In
this way, they are trying to control their image and empower themselves, though the
movement is not united by any means (Premdas 2001: 29).
The Maya Leaders Alliance is one of the few organized groups actively involved
in advocating for indigenous Maya rights. Other activists include the Maya of the

19

southern Toledo District, who continue to vigorously argue that they are indigenous to
that part of Belize. Specifically, the Maya Cultural Council of Toledo claims indigeneity
"as a means of justifying ownership of a vast area that they want to be officially declared
a 'Maya Homeland"' (Premdas 2001:15). Notably, Julian Chu was an educated Maya
activist who represented Maya all over the world, particularly at indigenous conferences
sponsored by the UN. A few years ago, he led a minor united resistance against
Malaysian logging companies trying to operate in Belize, and had organized protests in
the capital city. Unfortunately, he died under mysterious circumstances, and many Maya
believe the government was somehow involved, adding to their feeling of helplessness
and resentment in dealings with the government (GP, personal communication, 5/24/06).

The Maya Centre and the Cockscomb Basin Wildlife Sanctuary: A Case Study
Since AD 1000, the central zone of the Maya region (Yucatan, Chiapas and
Tabasco states in Mexico, and Belize) has been covered by tropical rainforest (Dobson
1973: 16). Thus, the Maya have for a millennium been living in small villages, mostly
within the Maya Forest, and managing their food requirements through mi/pa (slash-andbum) fanning.
"GC" is a Maya man who grew up in one of these rainforest villages following
this traditional lifestyle with his family. His family along with the other Maya families
had been growing maize, hunting, fishing, conducting agroforestry, and forest
management through starting and maintaining a network of trails. Some of those living
in the forest became quite adept at botany and medicinal plants particularly due to

20

necessity. His father arrived at the rainforest now known as the Cockscomb Basin
Wildlife Sanctuary in the early 1960s from the southern Maya district of Toledo.
38 Maya families lived in Cockscomb Basin Wildlife Sanctuary since that time,
mostly related to each other, though historically this area has intennittently been
inhabited by the Maya, as it is located in the center of what is known as the "Maya
Forest" (JC, personal communication, 5/25/06/06). You make it sound as ifno one lived
in this area before GC. If so, where did these Maya come from and what was their
homeland? -Is this really what you mean to say? When the government decided to make
it a nature preserve in 1983, most of the Maya started to leave in shifts (GC, personal
communication, 5/21/06). However, nine families stayed on until they were officially
forced to leave in 1984 (JC, personal communication, 5/25/06). Many of them moved to
the Maya Centre nearby, which had been established in 1972 at the edge of the rainforest.
They apparently did not receive any kind of compensation (land or money), and
were ultimately forced to move due to the imminent development of the Sanctuary (GC,
personal communication, 5/23/06). GC's brother, OC, noted that the only benefit to
moving to the Maya Center was the possibility of getting a state education (OC, personal
communication, 5/22/06). The Maya fought the government for land because most of the
area surrounding the Maya Center are run by private agricultural businesses

He added

that before the growth of the Maya Center upon their arrival, there was no running water.
When the families started to arrive, they had "to fight for ... water because most of the
lands around [them were] operated by agricultural companies that use dangerous
chemicals." Finally the British military installed a tank, and now an NGO maintains it.
(GC, personal communication, 5/22/06).

21

The sanctuary was created because a conservationist and jaguar biologist named
Alan Rabinowitz had advocated for it, claiming that the jaguar population, along with
several other endangered animals, was dwindling (1986: 20). Initially, a combination of
logging wildlife protection and tourism was envisaged for the sanctuary, but following a
proposal from the BAS (Belize Audobon Society) and the World Wildlife Fund (WWF),
a comer (covering the area of an old lease to the Development Finance Corporation) was
set aside as the Cockscomb Basin Wildlife Sanctuary in March 1986 (SI 32), "for nature
conservation to take the dominant role." (BELIZE). The current sanctuary covers over
200 hectares, and was given protection status "specifically to target the preservation of
the Jaguar (Matola 2001: 4). The sanctuary also serves to protect the watersheds of
important rivers, and currently preserves biodiversity, hosting over 300 bird species, 200
jaguars, parrots, black howler monkeys, toucans and a lot of other species found only in
South American tropical forests. Right next to the Wildlife Sanctuary on its northern
border is a 'National Park,' though its origins are not fully known. (Belize Parks).
As noted above, part of the reason the Cockscomb Wildlife Sanctuary was
established was to attract tourists. A website sponsored in part by the Belize Tourism
Industry Association notes that the creation of the sanctuary was partially "promoted on
the basis of its educational and eco-tourism potential." It is therefore indicative that they
have separate entrance fees for natives and foreigners--Belizeans pay $2.50 and
foreigners, $10. The park manages an intricate trail system and facilities for overnight
stay, and the sanctuary is widely promoted attraction, known as the only Jaguar Preserve
in the world. Even a cultural attraction exists, a minor Maya ceremonial site known as
Chucil Baluum dating from the Classic Period (Belize Parks).

22

When the government finally agreed to the establishment of the sanctuary,
however, it could not reconcile the problem of what to do with the native inhabitants. As
one scholar noted, this kind of displacement from protected areas "is one of the most
controversial and contested aspects of protected areas" (West et. al 2006: 5). Chapin
adds that conservationists, in their zeal to protect the environment, "frequently seem to be
behind the evictions" (2004: 18). The same site sponsored in part by the Belize Tourism
Association attempts to justify the creation of the park by claiming that about 80% of
households "benefit financially from visitors to the sanctuary." Yet this figure seems
quite arbitrary, as there is no indication as to which households they mean, and if the
statement is referring to the Maya Center, it is implausible, as there are only 3 tour guides
and 2 places to stay (GC, personal communication, 5/21/06/06).
According to GC (and verified by other villagers), when the Maya families moved
to the Maya Centre, they at first received no financial or land compensation. The
expropriated Maya families demanded that the government arrange to give them some
land, since most of the area surrounding the Maya Centre is owned by private agricultural
businesses. This would seem to have violated both their human rights and the Belizean
constitution, which promises "protection from arbitrary deprivation of property" (Modem
Legal Systems). It also violates the Belizean Land Acquisition (Public Purposes) Act,
although this act does not address the issue of eminent domain in great detail. Only two
clauses address the right of the interested party/owner, acknowledging a right of access to
the courts, one for the purpose of determining "whether the acquisition was duly carried
out for a public purpose" and the other to make claims for compensation (BelizeLegal).

23

The expropriated Maya were also supposed to have been given priority in
business related to Cockscomb Basin Wildlife Sanctuary Jaguar Preserve, such as the
allocation of contracts and employment, although in practice this never materialized. JC
told me that he only knows one person who used to live in the sanctuary who still works
there (JC, personal communication, 5/25/06). GC also told me that he and the other
Maya are only allowed to enter the sanctuary as private tour guides, unless they pay an
entrance fee like regular tourists.
The refugees did, in fact, eventually receive some swampy land located across the
main highway from their new village. Yet only part of this land is useable for any sort
cultivation and is limited to citrus fruit plots. Apparently, the local citrus market is not
even particularly lucrative, and the Maya lack the financial capital to buy equipment to
increase production and maximize profits (JC, personal communication, 5/25/06).
Furthermore, as citrus fruits are not part of traditional Maya cuisine, they sell these fruits
and supplement their diet by finding land on the banks of a nearby river to grow
essentials such as maize and vegetables (GC, personal communication, 5/22/06).
Those Maya that were particularly knowledgeable in terms of the layout of the
park (trails), animal sounds and botany (people like GC and his brother) became tour
guides of their former home. They merely received a national license after taking a basic
test and have been practicing ever since. Anyone with basic training in forestry can take
the test. In the Maya Center, GC and JC are trying to train others specifically about
Cockscomb Wildlife Basic Sanctuary, though it is becoming increasingly difficult to find
young people who are not bent on moving to the cities. As GC noted, "I teach as much

24

as I can to whoever wants to listen" On Earth Day each year, he invites all who are
interested to join him for forest tours (GC, personal communication, 5/21/06)
As this case study demonstrates, despite their potential cultural and economic
contributions to the national economy, (particularly as beacons of traditional ecological
knowledge, or TEK) the Maya have minimal political representation to voice their
concerns about land rights and other pressing issues. The Maya living in this village (as
well as others) have had difficulty getting their voices heard and needs attended to by the
government; unlike other Belizean ethnic groups fighting for their rights, the Maya have
only one representative in government, as aforementioned (OC, personal communication,
5/22/06). Moreover, his position as a Minister of Works is not particularly powerful, and
according to many doesn't carry a lot of weight -- he "can't pull anything" (GP, personal
communication, 5/24/06) ..
While the government may not have specifically targeted the entire Maya
population for resettlement, "the process of migration of the various ethnic groups
resulted in a very clearly defined ethno-geographical distribution of the population which
facilitated the state in fashioning an ethnic-based land policy" (Barnett 2001: 11 ).
Essentially, this mass relocation weakened the population and any efforts to assert their
indigenous claim. This point is made more salient by the fact that this was not the first
time the government supported a policy of purposely unequal land management?]; due to
the remnants of colonialism, at the end of 1986, less than 2% of landowners owned more
than 85% of privately owned land, while 85% oflandowners held less than 4% (Barnett
2001:13).

25

Indelibly, government decisions to privatize (as has been the case in the history of
logging) or zone off the rainforests for nature reserves have profoundly affected the
Maya. The government's policy of encouraging nationalism has been an attempt to forge
a Belizean identity, yet practically, there has been discontent and a "growing ethnic
consciousness" due to uneven development and bias (Barnett 2001: 12). In the words of
one of the former residents of the rainforest, "I understand that the goal [of making the
preserve] was to protect wildlife, but the fact that we lost our right to the land, that was
unfair-we are used to living off of nature" (GC, personal communication, 5/21/06).

Biological versus Cultural Preservation
More than 70% of Central America has been deforested within the past 40 years
(Mato la 2001: 1). The Maya Forest, stretching across Belize, Guatemala and Mexico, is
the largest expanse of tropical forest north of the Amazon Basin, covering 25,000 square
kilometers. Population Action International has called the Maya Forest "a biodiversity
hotspot" with more than 24,000 plants, 5,000 of which are endemic, and it holds second
place in the list of25 regional resources most at risk (Ford 2001: 5). Thus, the Belizean
government deserves to be commended for its concern for the nation's forests. Belize
has over 40 percent of its land under some category of official protection. But unlike the
86 percent of the national sanctuaries in South America that are inhabited or used by
local peoples, Belize's protected zones are effectively off limits to its indigenous groups
(Mato la 2001: 1; Little 1999: 269).
In the case of the Cockscomb Basin Wildlife Sanctuary, the Belizean
government's actions in dispossessing the Maya were motivated by environmental

26

reasons rather than purely economic ones. A combination of motivated individuals as
well as international organizations like the WWF all came together and convinced the
government to protect the area due to biodiversity concerns as well as due to the
possibility of ecotourism.
Yet concern for the preservation of biodiversity should not negate a concern for
the preservation of cultural diversity. The UNESCO Convention on the Protection and
Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions defined cultural diversity as "the
manifold ways in which the cultures of groups and societies find expression." Few things
differentiate humans from animals, and culture is one of them. Furthermore, from an
evolutionary perspective, humans in different environments have developed cultural
adaptations such as different medicines which, upon study, can most likely help
humankind in general. Thus, in many ways, the preservation of cultural diversity is
essential to the survival of humanity.
Also, the preservation of biological diversity is strongly correlated with the
preservation of cultural diversity; a full understanding of the needs of biological
conservation would only be enhanced by indigenous knowledge of the landscape.
Landscapes should be understood as "a meeting ground between nature and people,
between the past and present, and between tangible and intangible values (Brown et al
2005: 1). According to the World Heritage Convention, cultural landscapes are
"illustrative of the evolution of human society and settlement over time, ... and as a
diversity of manifestations of the interaction between humankind and its natural
environment" (Brown et al. et al 2005: 6). This interaction has allowed many people

27

living in the natural environment, like indigenous peoples, become very attuned to their
surroundings and the needs of conservation.
The World Conservation Union (IUCN) has become increasingly cognizant of
the links between cultural and biological preservation. For example, it uses the term
"cultural landscape" to "represent a tightly woven net of relationships that are the essence
of culture and people's identity" also a vague definition (Brown 2005:6). Among the
priorities for its 2005-2008 mandate, the IUCN's Commission on Environmental,
Economic, and Social Policy (CEESP) includes the "improved understanding of the
synergy between cultural diversity and biological diversity and on how this may be
harnessed and applied towards shared values, tools, mechanisms and processes that
enhance conservation and promote a more sustainable and equitable use of natural
resources" (Maffi 2005:8).
Without a doubt, tension exists between prioritizing environmental and cultural
conservation. This tension or "the interaction between political and environmental
variables" is known as political ecology (Little 1999: 255). Although theoretically,
ecotourism is a positive phenomenon, in reality, "ecotourism often causes conflict and
changes in land-use rights [while failing] to deliver promises of community-level
benefits" (West et. al 2006: 9). Additionally, it seems that ecotourism can inadvertently
make the people living in the surroundings of the attraction part of the attraction. In this
way, ecotourism creates "simplistic images oflocal people and their uses and
understanding of their surroundings" (West et. al 2006: 9). Unfortunately, making people
seem more primitive and less a part of the real world can also diminish the political
reality regarding land usage.

28

With a little foresight and willingness to bring people of different ethnicities and
histories together, however, it is possible to reconcile this tension of preservation. Since
historically, indigenous peoples-who have extensive, useful TEK- have been excluded
from preservation efforts, Latin American governments have not always been successful
at protecting wildlife. For example, while the Cockscomb Basin Wildlife Sanctuary was
given protection status "specifically to target the preservation of the jaguar. .. the jaguars
found there undoubtedly travel into neighboring forests, both for search of food and
breeding partners" (Mato la 2001 :4). Clearly, nature conservation cannot be achieved
sustainably "within 'islands' of strict protection surrounded by areas of environmental
neglect"(Mitchell 2001: 2). Perhaps if the Belizean government allowed the Maya to
become more involved in the sanctuary in general, they would be more motivated in
helping to achieve its goals.
Perhaps the biggest problem with the Cockscomb Basin Wildlife Sanctuary is the
allegation of poor management. . The Belize Audubon Society (BAS), an organization
linked to the national government, was formed specifically to oversee the Cockscomb
Basin Wildlife Sanctuary and other national parks. The BAS is also allegedly notoriously
corrupt - a claim made not only by the Maya, but by observers like an American in
Belize who told me that BAS "has many problems, many [of the members] are co-opted
politically" (PH, personal communication, 5/23/06). Maya tour guide GC related a rumor
that negotiations are taking place between BAS and a major logging firm that owns
property next to the Cockscomb Basin Wildlife Sanctuary. This enterprise wants to build
a resort right next to the preserve, and has already cut a road through the preserve.

29

To make matters worse, that road is now apparently being used by hunters and
poachers. GC notified the authorities of these activities, but received no response (GC,
personal communication, 5/23/06). GC's fellow tour guide and brother, JC, added that
people are finding ways into the sanctuary to hunt and fish illegally, but BAS is not
prosecuting them. He denounced this indifference, saying "If you really care about the
forest, you should really protect it" (JC, personal communication, 5/25/06).
Along with the corruption, BAS seems to be neglecting basic maintenance. As
GC noted, "they don't maintain the roads, they don't build bridges on the trails, and they
don't treat their security workers well." Additionally, the EU and WWF have provided
funds to take care of sanctuary and animals, though this does not seem to be happening.
For example, the Japanese govermnent gave money to make a conference room and
vehicles to no avail GC claimed that when the sanctuary authorities asked for more
money so the Japanese sent a representative to "oversee the projects himself' (GC,
personal communication, 5/22/06).

The Value of Maya Ethnobotanical Knowledge
As tour guides in Cockscomb Basin Wildlife Sanctuary Be consistent in names
such as this throughout the entire document (do a search and replace throughout the
thesis). If it is a preserve, then use that term and not sanctuary and other former rainforest
homes, the Maya are the last living sources of traditional ecological knowledge (TEK)
regarding the Belizean rainforest. Ethnobotanical knowledge is not only central to their
culture, but is also of immense value to humankind. The tour guides had extensive
knowledge of plants used for cooking as well as for medicinal purposes, and the bushmen

30

know even more. In this way, biological and cultural diversity are intimately linked
concepts.
While the Maya's botanical knowledge clearly has immense cultural value,
ranging from usage as remedies for ailments to cooking ingredients, -you need to
convince the reader first rather than assume this. judging its tangible worth is harder to
assess. Preliminary studies by ethuobotanists Balick and Mendelsohn 1992 estimate that
the annual local value of medicinal plants sustainably harvested from a single hectare in
the tropical forest of Belize is between $726 and $3,327(129). Furthermore, Balick and
Mendelsohn predicted that the value of tropical forests for the harvest of non timber
forest products (NTFP) "will increase relative to other land uses over time as these forests
become more scarce" (Balick 1992:130).
Significantly, less than 1% of tropical species in the world have been studied for
pharmaceutical potential, though about 1/4 of western medicine are phytomedicinals, or
plant derived, and of all plant-derived medicine currently used, 74% was first discovered
and used by native cultures (Balick 1996:145; Woytek 2004: 117). Indeed, one scholar
estimates that the annual world market for medicines derived from indigenous people is
$43 billion, though reportedly less than 0.001 % of the profits from drugs that originated
from traditional medicines have ever gone to the indigenous peoples who led researchers
to them (Brush 1996:55). Considering that the wealth of knowledge inherent in Maya
ethuobotanical expertise has hardly been consulted in the search for new medicines, it
seems a vast health resource for humankind in general and an economic resource for the
Maya is awaiting research.

31

Problems with Preserving Ethnobotanical Knowledge
Unfortunately, the potential of these medicinal plants is in danger of being lost to
the world forever if not recorded in some way, as the Maya population is economically
disadvantaged and cannot afford to preserve this knowledge in a concrete way. As noted
earlier, the Maya were deprived of their means of subsistence without receiving adequate
compensation. Regrettably, being deprived of their land also meant being deprived of the
primary means to retain and pass on ethnobotanical lmowledge. Thus, they have also
been indirectly forced to give up their traditional resource rights (TRR) (Riley 2004:127).
Moreover, the government's confiscation of the rainforest lands also violated the
indigenous Maya's de facto environmental rights, which are "the claims and rights of
peoples to territories, natural resources, knowledge systems" (Little 1999:267).
A discussion of Maya language would be relevant here (how many dialects, how
many native speakers in Belize and percentage of population, the importance of language
preservation and TEK, etc. discussed TEK earlier ... Today around two million Maya
(Yucatec, Mopan, and Kechi/Q)echi) speak 15 different dialects and languages
(Rabinowitz 1986:36). Of287,730 people populating the country, the Maya make up
10.6% of the population (CIA Factbook). Neither the past nor present generations of
Maya in Belize have been encouraged to value and commemorate their culture. They are
discouraged from speaking their traditional language, and knowledge of Maya history
prior to the Spanish invasion is lacking in Belizean school textbooks. Therefore, Maya
children's potential curiosity in their origins and heritage is not promoted. As one of the
tour guides commented, "Maya culture is not strong, school is taught in English" (OC,
personal communication, 5/22/06). Without respect or regard for tradition, the

32

government also does not condone consulting medicine men or buslunen as it claims
these practices are dangerous.
Moreover, the threat to the continuity of the Maya heritage into the next
generation is compounded by the fact that it lives almost entirely as oral history, with
little being recorded. The Maya are used to an oral tradition and young people do not
seem to see the value of learning or preserving their culture, particularly with respect to
the ethnobotanical knowledge of the tour guides in the Maya Centre.
FP noted the irony that while international interest in indigenous medicinal and
architectural knowledge is growing, many young Maya think their native lore is not
worth learning (FP, personal communication, 5/29). With a tangible note of sadness, GC
said, "most young people don't care to learn about the old ways, they learn about modem
culture." Furthermore, young people "leave, go to school, come back and go to work"
(GC, personal communication, 5/21/06). He feared that although his nephew was being
groomed to join his father and GC in the tour guide business, his attendance at high
school meant that "he might be changing his path" (GC, personal communication,
5/22/06). One of the village healers commented on this phenomenon as well, stating that
the "young generation isn't interested any more" (A, personal communication, 5/23/06).
In attempting to document and preserve her knowledge, she had to ask someone to
volunteer, as her children were either unable or uninterested in this task.
This lack of interest in their native culture is partially due to government policies.
As noted earlier, the government makes no effort to acknowledge the culture of the Maya
except in tourism contexts, and additionally makes little effort to teach about Maya

33

heritage in its public education. Of course, the effects of technology and globalization
inevitably compound the cultural erosion.
The fact that the Maya are guarded about their cultural knowledge, even amongst
themselves, presents a final challenge to its preservation. As one of the village healers
explained, "our medicines were thought evil by the Spanish, so we kept [the knowledge]
secretly ... We have to choose who to pass it on to -- usually it's a close family member"
(A, personal communication, 5/23/06). Another informant confirmed that Maya
medicinal knowledge is "passed on in the family, kept to ourselves" (Father of GC,
personal communication, 5/27). A third Maya also commented on this problem, saying
that "people are ignorant, they don't share their ideas" since they feel they can make
money with their secret knowledge (GP, personal communication, 5/24/06).
In all of these ways, the Maya have become disjointed as a culture and as a people.
Govermnent policies regarding education is partly to blame, but I would argue that land
policies play a larger role. In other words, if the Maya had some kind of homeland or
base (such as within the Maya Forest) they would be able to aggregate the economic
resources and generate the motivation to preserve their cultural heritage and valuable
TEK specifically. Furthermore, preservation of the TEK would necessitate preservation
of the habitat in which these medicinal plants reside, namely, the precious rainforest.

Potential Solutions
There are several potential ways through which the Maya could protect their
ethnobotanical knowledge and become politically empowered. From a legal standpoint,
the concept of intellectual property rights (IPR) would be applicable in preserving their

34

knowledge, or at least protecting it from misappropriation, as it would be an official
means of laying claim to their knowledge. Yet, due to several issues such as the fact that
in the western legal paradigm IPR protects individual as opposed to collective knowledge
and original as opposed to traditional knowledge, this solution may not be optimal in
protecting the Maya's ethnobotanical knowledge. Also, IPR enforcement generally
incurs high transaction costs, and considering the poverty of most indigenous peoples,
cost can be a prohibitive factor. In addition, conservation oflmowledge requires a longterm commitment, while IPR is usually only a short-term solution (after a specific period
of time, for example, a patent is no longer effective). Finally, individual management
may be inadequate to manage resources over a large area. As Brush also pointed out,
"states are unlikely to accept either the goal of equity for indigenous interests or the
burdens of managing direct compensation" (Brush 1993 :666).
Balancing the needs of indigenous peoples and the interests of researchers and
scientists is still possible without IPR. As long as one bears in mind the dangers of
overcontrol and regulation, there are a few avenues for conducting research, particularly
ethnobotanical research, that ensure all parties are treated equally and can share benefits
equitably:
1) Contracts. They have low transaction costs, and create a market for indigenous
knowledge (Brush 1996: 17). They also ensure that there both short and longterm benefits accrue to all parties (Balick 1996:158). Finally, they guarantee the
terms for the transfer of knowledge, and in many national settings, "require no
new legal instruments" making the transfer relatively easy (Greaves 1994: 9).

35

2) Material Transfer Agreements (MTAs). These involve one party providing
information or resources in exchange for monetary or non-monetary payment
(Woytek et. al 2004:36).
3) Royalty agreements and "institutional authentication labels" (Brush 1996:253). A
royalty agreement essentially specifies that if a collected plant sample results in a
profitable pharmaceutical product on the market, the provider of that sample may
collect royalties.
A few scholars such as Dr. Rosita Arvigo of Galen University in Belize and Dr.
Michael Balick of the New York Botanical Garden have focused on ethnobotanical
research in Belize. The two worked together for a few years on the Belize Ethnobotany
Project (BEP), a collaborative effort of the New York Botanical Garden's Institute for
Economic Botany, the Ix Che! Tropical Research Foundation, and the Belize Center for
Environmental Studies. The project collected data from more than 25 traditional healers
of Maya, Garifuna, Creole, East Indian, and Mennonite descent. A database was
established at the New York Botanical Garden with "planned distribution" to several
computer facilities in Belize (Balick et al 1996:327). Also, the BEP worked with the
Belize College of Agriculture (BCA), Central Farms to learn how to grow more than two
dozen different plants used in traditional medicine in Belize (Balick et al 1996: 332).
Finally, the researchers managed to compile 2,600 bulk plant samples to send to the US
National Cancer Institute (Balick et al 1996:327). The Ix Che! Tropical Research
Foundation still exists but was absorbed by a ecotourism lodge (maintains a visitor's
center, education, tours, study groups, outreach, and some research).

36

Although the project ended in 1997, the data demonstrated that protecting the
rainforest and its medicinal plants is economically viable. It was also one of the few
examples of successful collaborations between mostly Western researchers and native
people in ethnobotanical studies. Its success inspired conservation efforts in Belize, as is
described below (Balick 1994:316).
Another attempt to preserve ethnomedicine was the Terra Nova Rain Forest
Reserve, a 6,000-acre parcel ofland set aside by the government of Belize in 1993. The

Belize Ethnobotany Project (BEP) mentioned above is deeply involved in this endeavor
as well (Balick et al 1996: 332). This reserve could be termed an ethnobotanical garden
as it contains "a specialized botanical collection that allows traditional knowledge and
ancestral practices to be maintained in the growing of plants used with medicinal,
economical or cultural purposes" (Sarmiento et al 2006:3).
Due to these aspects, the Terra Nova Rainforest Reserve has been called the
world's first "ethnobiomedical forest reserve" (Balick et al 1996: 332). The Belize
Association of Traditional Healers (BATH), an ethnically mixed group ofBelizeans
involved in healthcare with an interest in traditional medicine, manages it. The program
there involves teaching apprentices about traditional medicine as well as conducting
ethnobotanical and ecological research. Part of the aim of this reserve was to have
sustainable development, a preservation of both biological and cultural diversity:
programs in traditional medicine, scientific research and ecotourism "should create a
synergistic effect to translate into economic return for the surrounding community"
(Balick 1996: 332).

37

Lamentably, the noble intentions of commercial ethnobotanical projects cannot
guarantee success in the market. Shaman Pharmaceuticals sought to be a model bioprospecting entity, encouraging research in tropical countries. Specifically, it sought to
isolate bioactive compounds from tropical plants that have a history of medicinal use to
empower local communities, promote environmental conservation, and to make the
medicinal remedies more accessible to the world market. Yet it failed to market any
pharmaceutical products and ultimately went bankrupt ffialick et al 1996: 248).
Ethnobotanist Mark Plotkin took a more educational approach in founding the
Amazon Conservation Team (ACT). ACT works with indigenous peoples to preserve
their lmowledge. Specifically, Plotkin has taught tribes in the Amazon how to use Global
Positioning Systems to map their lands, and therefore know exactly what their territorial
boundaries are (Royte 2005 :39). This data is essential for a map of indigenous territories,
and might also ideally include cultural data, topographic and historical features, as well
as natural resources that could be used by the indigenous people to lay claim to certain
areas on more legitimate grounds explain (Finger 2004). As Plotkin said in an interview,
"Tribes come to us. They want to protect their forest, culture, system of healing, they
want clean water, job opportunities, ethno-education" (Royte 2005: 39). ACT specializes
in helping shamans and apprentices share medicinal knowledge with the next generation
in his model of ethno-education
As Plotkin has proved in his successful models for empowering indigenous
people, "ethno-education" is essential to the cultural survival of any group, including the
Maya in Belize. They have for too long been taught to believe their culture is worthless
or inferior to the majority culture; without effective educational initiatives showing the

38

value of their ethnobotanical lore as well as their culture in general, an innneasurably
important source of knowledge will be surely be lost.
"FP," a teacher and member of the Maya Leader's Alliance, has acknowledged
the importance of this ethno-educational aspect and founded a Maya educational center
which he has been directing in Belize for the last five years. He told me he had to lobby
hard for its establishment, and the only reason he managed to get a site for the school was
that he found an abandoned site in Toledo. For the past five years he has been raising
money through grants, though it's "a constant struggle." UNICEF has taken notice of the
success of the center and is currently hosting two primary school pilot programs using the
Center as a model. Most recently, in the summer of 2006, the center sponsored a
symposium on intercultural education featuring the participation of the Maya Leader's
Alliance, the Ministry of Education and UNICEF (FP, personal connnunication, 5/29/06).
"FP"'s "Maya Intercultural Education Initiative," has many components. As a
member of the Maya Leader's Alliance, he claims to have created the center with several
large goals in mind, including influencing national policies. The curriculum aims to
"shape people's lmowledge and integrity, identity" through teachings of cultural heritage
too vague (FP, personal communication, 5/29). Specifically, the center teaches about
communication, the media and computers, adopting "an intercultural approach that
validates knowledge" -- including staples of Maya culture such as the calendar, music,
art, and language. Most meetings are conducted in the Kekchi and Mopan languages
Significantly, the teaching method is traditional-elder teachers give "independent
training," (FP, personal communication, 5/29/06).

39

I have yet to visit the Center, but "PP" claims that the effect of the curriculum can
be seen beyond the school walls, encouraging parents to talk to their children about their
own cultural knowledge, "whatever was locked up." Furthermore, "PP" claimed that
parents can become inspired by their children's embracing of their culture, and begin to
influence policymakers. He observed that ultimately, the students become better
equipped to "handle their own culture and the modern world" (PP, personal
communication, 5/29).
The ideas behind ethno-education can serve as a good guide for potential action in
Belize. Overall, the creation of an ethnobotanical database is the best way to preserve
cultural knowledge and get credit for it. Establishing a comprehensive database of Maya
ethnobotanical and medicinal knowledge ofNTFPs (non-timber forest products) would
help to convert their cultural capital into economic capital and potentially preserve this
valuable resource for the Maya people as well as the world with enough guidance and
determination. As another source also noted, the documentation and potential publication
of ethnomedicinal data "could be seen as a compromise between protecting indigenous
interests and rights to traditional knowledge and resources, and facilitating access" (Riley
2004: 293)
This Belizean Maya database could draw from research that is currently being
conducted on methodology for investigating, recording and transmitting ethnobotanical
and ethnoecological knowledge. There is also extensive research being done to identify
factors (such as age, formal education, bilingual ability, length ofresidency, change in
subsistence practice, etc.) that "may affect the maintenance or loss ofTEK," (Maffi
2005:3). If the researchers draw on the model provided by the BEP and passionately seek

40

to unite the researchers with their subject and the national government, the creation of the
database might be possible. It is imperative that the Maya would be involved through the
entire process, and perhaps through the medium of a contract, establish that they and the
scientists would have sole access to the data. If the village agreed to publication of the
database, then they could potentially sell it to pharmaceutical companies, and if nothing
else, use it to teach their children. As one scholar noted, though there have been few
successful examples of translation ofTEK into economically viable drugs, -"there is no
reason why ethnobotanical techniques and rational drug design cannot complement each
other" (Brown 1998:142).
Documenting the knowledge ofNTFPs and then teaching future generations about
the valne of this knowledge in cultural heritage/knowledge educational initiatives could
empower the Mayas culturally, economically and politically. Not only would it establish
and reinforce pride in their culture and heritage among current and future generations, but
it would also give them a database of knowledge that may be potentially lucrative if sold
to pharmaceutical companies. Establishing an indigenous database of knowledge may
thus serve to ensure that their grievances are heard, their rights are preserved, and their
culture is respected.
Historically, indigenous peoples have generally been effective stewards of their
environment, expertly managing the natural resources of their native lands. This view
has many critics, including Mac Chapin, but I would argue that the indigenous people
have an important role to play in the environment in any case. Cultural ecology "stresses
the role oflocal knowledge in adapting to specific physical conditions such as fragile
tropical soils or scarce animal resources" (Brush 1993: 658). Naturally, studying and

41

appreciating ethnobotany "involves both promotion and protection of those plants,
peoples and interrelationships that it seeks to understand" (Riley 2004).
Hence, eliciting support of the indigenous Maya for preserving the Cockscomb
Basin Sanctuary, who have extensive knowledge of the flora and fauna of the Maya
Forest, should be a key tactic in the government's preservation goals. At this point, it
would make sense for the government to encourage BAS to hire the Maya to be local tonr
guides especially those who are part of the Maya generation old enough to have grown up
and trained in the ways of the forest. These tour guides are the nation's last surviving
founts of knowledge regarding the rainforest.
To rectify the apparent conflict between the biological and cultural preservation, I
propose a "Protected Landscape Approach?" that advocates indigenous stewardship as
well as natural conservation. The Protected Landscape Approach was first proposed by
the IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature), a group coordinated by the
World Wildlife Fund (WWF) (Brown et al. 2005: 2). This approach ultimately
emphasizes sustainability ofresource management, while encouraging indigenous people
to play a large role in this effort.
Specifically, indigenous people like the Maya should become involved in "active
conservation stewardship" (Sarmiento et al. 2005: 12). In this context, stewardship
indicates a community's responsible management of forest sustainability as well as their
own societies within the forest. Its main goal is "to create, nurture, and enable
responsibility in land ... and resource users to manage and protect land and its natural and
cultural heritage" (Brown et al 2005 :3). Stewardship can therefore also be seen as a
means of empowerment, as indigenous people are directly involved (Mitchell 2001 :6).

42

"Protected landscapes" are not only particular places, but also refer to a process
that "guides and accommodates change" (Brown et al. 2005: 13). A protected area is
defined as "an area ofland and/or sea especially dedicated to the protection and
maintenance of biological diversity and of natural and associated cultural resources and
managed through legal or other effective means" (Brown et al. 2005: 4). Such
designations are essential, as many govermuents are having difficulty balancing different
developmental needs in the face of globalization pressures. As described by proponent
Nora Mitchell, the protected landscape approach promotes heritage protection while also
encouraging "direct engagement of key stakeholders" as it encourages stewardship of the
land by those that live upon it (Mitchell 2001 :5).
Stewardship emphasizes the natural choice of employing those who have
physically lived in the forest to protect it. In fact, this concept inherently takes advantage
of their wealth of knowledge, their "traditional management systems, innovation and love
of place" (Mitchell 2001:6). This approach is echoed in the 1980 World Conservation
Strategy which emphasizes integrated conservation and development projects (ICDPs).
The strategy was developed by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature
(IUCN), the World Wildlife Fund, and the United Nations Enviroruuental Program
following "the widespread failure of the traditional fences and fines approach to protected
area management" (Dove 2006: 6).
Despite critics of the Protected Landscape Approach and similar approaches, the
strongest motivation for "the protection and maintenance ofbiocultural diversity can
come, not from top-down efforts, but only from the ground-up action of indigenous and
other societies worldwide whose languages, cultural identities, and lands are being

43

threatened by global forces" (Maffi 2005: 12). As one scholar noted, the studies of
ethnobiology and ethnoecology provide "a framework for linking categories with action
plans and, in effect, environmental perception with resource management practices"
(Nazarea 2006: 4).
[Even if] the Maya are not made stewards of the whole Maya Forest, the
government should support the establishment of ethnobotanical gardens such as the Terra
Nova discussed previously. Given the size and importance that the ecotourism industry

has already assumed? in Belize, the government should take advantage of the appeal of
having indigenous peoples give tours of their rainforest. As one scholar observed, "the
signature resources of the Maya Forest, those which attract visitors and income into the
region, are both its cultural and natural amenities" (Mato la 2001 :2). The Garafuna on the
central coast seem to be successful in marketing their culture as well, promoting their
food, festivals, and a laid back attitude that suits the beach. Therefore, if a combined
ecotourism and cultural tourism plan is developed, there would be greater economic
incentives for conservation, "especially by adding value to local biodiversity and
landscape features" (Matola 2001 :4).
Non governmental organizations (NGOs) like UNESCO, Conservation
International, the Nature Conservancy and Cultural Survival. Might also be interested in
promoting a stewardship or "Protected Landscape Approach" transition needed here. Yet
more effective than mere funding or more theories would be the establishment of clear
guidelines to preservation. An article by Mark Chapin shows that even well-meaning
NGOs can neglect native populations in the interest of preserving biological diversity.
He argues that NGOS have a "new focus on large-scale conservation strategies and the

44

importance of science, rather than social realities, in determining their agendas"
(2004:18).
Furthermore, he notes that attempts in the 1990s to promote sustainable
development by conservation organizations "were generally paternalistic, Jacking in
expertise, and one-sided ... with little indigenous input" (2004: 20). Finally, in illustrating
the attitudes of many biological conservationists, he mentioned their claim that what they
do is conservation, not "poverty alleviation" (implying that any work they do with
indigenous people falls into that category) (2004:27). Thus Chapin makes the salient
point that NGOs like the WWF have some promising approaches, but need to consider
indigenous peoples in the formulation of conservation.

IV. Conclusion
There could be a danger in representing and advocating for a local group, yet I
would agree with Dove in his analysis that "anthropologists' personal witnessing of
threats to their subjects imposes a moral responsibility" and furthermore, that "the uneven
topography of power in the world makes neutral representation by anthropologists
impossible." (Dove 2006: 9). Similarly, Public Interest Anthropology firmly advocates
participant action research. By advocating for the Traditional Resource Rights of the
Maya in Belize, I am attempting to avoid the pitfalls of"ethnographic refusal," or "the
refusal by ethnographers to write thickly about their subjects' own views in cases of
resistance" (Dove 2006: 9)
Advocating for these changes may be overly ambitious at this point. The
govermnent of Belize still needs to adopt a more flexible notion of national identity, one
that embraces ethnic [diversity] rather than trying to minimize it. One useful

45

philosophical approach is multiculturalism. At its most basic, multiculturalism embraces
a plentitude of cultures and ethnicities; and opens up dialogue and encourages debate. As
one scholar [put it], multiculturalism is "a politics ofreflexive ethnicity" (May 2004: 29).
Both ethnic diversity and multiculturalism are important for their roles in encouraging
investigation of political implications and questioning the dominant "discourses of group
boundaries" (May 2004: 27).
"Development with identity" would seem to be the key to giving indigenous
peoples and minority ethnicities the capacity to claim their rights and advance
economically. As one scholar even suggested, a policy to empower people needs to be
formed to extend native title "to cultural property and art forms that are inextricable from
land-based claims to political sovereignty and self-determination" (Riley 2004: 9). In
other words, indigenous people [don't] necessarily require a radical transformation of
govermnent institutions; however, reforms recognizing "the special status of indigenous
people and ... the terms of their relationship with the national state" are essential if
progress is to be made (Postero 2004: 182).
While IPR may not be the most effective means of protecting indigenous
knowledge, there are legal tools such as contracting that may help indigenous people get
the credit that is due them. International legal instruments such as the Convention on
Biological Diversity are also providing the basis for progress in that regard. With such a
wealth of cultural heritage -- especially regarding ethnobotanical knowledge -- at the
disposal of indigenous peoples like the Maya, it would be tragic not to find some way for
them to realize some benefit from it and improve their lives. Through stewardship of the
forests, educational initiatives and databases of ethnobotanical knowledge, the Maya of

46

Belize could finally make their voices heard and see their rights respected for the first
time in over 2,000 years. I look forward to the possibility of contributing to the
realization of that dream.

47

References Cited
Appelbaum, Nancy P., Anne S. MacPherson and Karin Alejandra Rosemblatt, eds.
2003 Race and Nation in Modem Latin America. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press.
Assies, Willem, Gemma van der Haar, and Andre Hoekema, eds.
1999 The Challenge of Diversity-Indigenous Peoples and Reform of the State in
Latin America. Amsterdam: Thela Thesis.
Balick, Michael, Elaine Elisabetsky and Sara A Laird, eds.
1996 Medicinal Resources of the Tropical Forest-Biodiversity and Its Importance
for Human Health. New York: Columbia University Press.
Balick, Michael, Rosita Arvigo and Leopoldo Romero.
1994 The Development of an Ethnobiomedical Forest Reserve in Belize: Its Role
in the Preservation of Biological and Cultural Diversity. Conservation Biology
8,(1): 316-317.
Balick, Michael, and Robert Mendelsohn.
1992 Assessing the Economic Value of Traditional Medicines in Tropical Rain
Forests. Conservation Biology. 6(1):128-130.
Barkan, Elazar, and Ronald Bush, eds.
2003 Claiming the Stones/Naming the Bones: Cultural Property and the
negotiation of national and ethnic identity. Getty Research Institute: Getty Trust
Publications
Barnett, Dr. Carla. Defining Ethnicity in Belize-Understanding Our History. Belize
Country Conference Pre-Prints. Paper presented at the Belize Country
Conference, University of the West et. al Indies, November 21-24, 2001.
http://www.uwichill.edu/bb/bnccde/belize/conference/papers/Bamett.html
Beteille, Andre.
1998 The Idea ofindigenous People. Current Anthropology 39(2): 187-191.
Bolland, 0. Nigel.
2003 Colonialism and Resistance in Belize: essays in historical sociology. 2nd revised
edition. Barbados: University of West Indies Press.
Brown, Jessica, Nora Mitchell, and Michael Beresford. The Protected Landscape
Approach-Linking Nature, Culture and Community. Cambridge: IUCN-The
World Conservation Union, 2005. Electronic Document.
http://www.iucn.org/bookstore/HTML-books/PA-protected -landscapeapproach/cover.html

48

Brown, Michael F.
1998 Can Culture Be Copyrighted? Current Anthropology 39(2):193-222.
Brush, Stephen R.
1993 Indigenous Knowledge of Biological Resources and Intellectual Property
Rights: The Role of Anthropology. American Anthropologist, New Series, 95(3):
653-71.
Brush, Stephen R, and Doreen Stabinsky, eds.
1996 Valuing Local Knowledge-Indigenous People and Intellectual Property
Rights. Washington DC: Island Press.
Brysk, Alison.
2000 From Tribal Village to Global Village-Indian Rights and International
Relations in Latin America. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Cal, Angel, PhD.
2004 Belize-Maya Civilization (Teacher's Handbook Primary School-Upper
Division). Center for Multi-cultural studies and University of Belize Press.
Belmopan: University of Belize.
Chapin, Mac.
2004. A Challenge to Conservationists. World Watch 17(6):17-31.
Central Intelligence Agency.
2006. CIA World Factbook. Electronic Resource.
https://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook/geos/bh.html
Cockscomb Basin Wildlife Sanctuary & Jaguar Preserve. Belize National Parks, Natural
Reserves, and Wildlife Sanctuaries.
2006. Electronic Document..
http://ambergriscaye.com/pages/town/parkcockscomb.htrnl
Dobson, Narda.
1976 A History of Belize. United Kingdom: Longman Group
Dove, Michael R.
2006 Indigenous People and Environmental Politics. Annual Review of
Anthropology, 35: 191-208.
Finger, J Michael and Philip Schuler, ed.
2004 Poor People's Knowledge. Washington DC: World Bank and Oxford
University Press
Ford, Anabel and Keith Clarke. Out of the past, in the present, and for the future of the
Maya Forest. Belize Country Conference Pre-Prints. Paper presented at the

49

Belize Country Conference, University of the West et. al Indies, November 21-24,
2001. Electronic Document.
http://www.uwichiJl.edu/bb/bnccde/belize/conference/papers/ford.html
Greaves, Tom, ed.
1994. Intellectual Property Rights for indigenous peoples: A source book.
Oklahoma City: Society for Applied Anthropology.
Little, Paul E.
1999 Environments and Environmentalisms in Anthropological Research: Facing
a New Millennium. Annual Review of Anthropology, 28: 253-84.
Maffi, Luisa.
2005 Linguistic, Cultural, and Biological Diversity. Annual Review of
Anthropology, 34: 599-617.
Matola, Sharon and Celso Poot. One forest, Three nations the biological and cultural
diversity of Belize. Belize Country Conference Pre-Prints. Paper presented at the
Belize Country Conference, University of the West et. al Indies, November 21-24,
2001. Electronic Resource.
http://www.uwichiJl.edu/bb/bnccde/belize/conference/papers/matola.html
May, Stephen, Tariq Modood, and Judith Squires, eds.
2004. Ethnicity, Nationalism, and Minority Rights. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Merry, Sally Engle.
2006 Anthropology and International Law. Annual Review of Anthropology, 35:
99-116
Mitchell, Nora, Jessica Brown, and Michael Beresford. Conclusions-the protected
laudscape approach: conservation for a sustainable future. Belize Country
Conference Pre-Prints. Paper presented at the Belize Country Conference,
University of the West Indies, November 21-24, 2001. Electronic Document.
http://www. uwichill. edu/b b/bnccde/belize/conference/papers/premdas .htm I
Nazarea, Virginia D.
2006 Local Knowledge aud Memory in Biodiversity Conservation. Annual
Review of Anthropology, 35: 317-335.

Niezen, Ronald.
2003 The Origins ofindigenism-Human Rights and the Politics ofidentity.
Berkeley: University of California Press.

50

Official Website of the Attorney General's Ministry. Land Acquisition Public Purposes
Act. Belize Legal Infom1ation Network Online.
2006. Electronic Document.
http://www.belizelaw.org/lawadmin/index2.html.
Palacio, Joseph.
1976 Anthropology in Belize. Current Anthropology, 17(3): 485-490.
Postero, Nancy Grey and Leon Zamosc, eds.
2004. The struggle for indigenous rights in Latin America. Brighton: Sussex
Academic Press.
Premdas, Ralph. Belize: Identity and Ethnicity in a Multi-Ethnic State. Belize Country
Conference Pre-Prints. Paper presented at the Belize Country Conference,
University of the West Indies, November 21-24, 2001. Electronic Document.
http://www. uwichill. edu/bb/bnccde/belize/conference/papers/premdas.html
Rabinowitz, Alan.
1986 Jaguar: One Man's Struggle to Establish the World's First Jaguar Preserve.
New York City: Doubleday.
Riley, Mary, ed.
2004 Indigenous Intellectual Property Rights: legal obstacles and innovative
solutions. Walnut Creek: Altamira Press.
Royte, Elizabeth.
2005 Mark Plotkin- 35 Who Made a Difference. Smithsonian Magazine
36(8):38-40
Salazar, Noel B. and Benjamin W. Porter.
2005 Cultural Heritage and Tourism: A Public Interest Approach. Introduction
to Anthropology in Action 11 (2/3): 2-8.
Sarmiento, Fausto, Guillermo Rodriguez, and Alejandro Argumedo. Cultural landscapes
of the Andes: indigenous and colono culture, traditional knowledge and ethnoecological heritage. Cambridge: IUCN-The World Conservation Union, 2005.
Electronic Document.
http://www.iucn.org/bookstore/HTML-books/P A-protected -landscapeapproach/PartII-section.html
Scafidi, Susan.
2005 Who Owns Culture-Appropriation and Authenticity in American Law.
New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
Sharer, Robert and Loa Traxler.
2006. The Ancient Maya-6 th Edition. Palo Alto: Stanford University Press.

51

Modern Legal Systems Encyclopedia-Central America and the Caribbean 7.40.5.
The Government of Belize. House of Representatives 2003 - 2008
2006. Electronic Document.
http://www.belize.gov.bz/legislative_houseofrep.html. Government of Belize
West, Paige, James Igoe, and Dan Brockington.
2006 Parks and Peoples: The Social Impact of Protected Areas. Armual Review
of Anthropology, 35: 251-277.
Williams Jr., Robert A.
1990 Encounters on the Frontiers oflnternational Human Rights Law:
Redefining the Terms of Indigenous Peoples' Survival in the World. Theme
Issue, "Frontiers of Legal Thought III," The Duke Law Journal, 1990(4):660704.
Woytek, Reinhard, Preeti Shroff-Mehta, and Prasad C. Mohan, eds.
2004 Indigenous Knowledge- Local Pathways to Global Development.
Knowledge and Leaming Group, Africa Region, The World Bank..

52

