Anthropology Senior Theses

University of Pennsylvania

ScholarlyCommons
Department of Anthropology

Spring 2006

Sport, Community, and the Ballgame at Yalbac, Belize
Joanne P. Baron
University of Pennsylvania

Follow this and additional works at: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses

Q

Part of the Anthropology Commons

Recommended Citation
Baron, Joanne P., "Sport, Community, and the Ballgame at Yalbac, Belize" (2006). Anthropology Senior
Theses. Paper 65.

This paper is posted at ScholarlyCommons. https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/65
For more information, please contact repository@pobox.upenn.edu.

Sport, Community, and the Ballgame at Yalbac, Belize
Disciplines
Anthropology

This thesis or dissertation is available at ScholarlyCommons: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/65

SPORT, COMMUNITY, AND THE BALLGAME AT YALBAC, BELIZE
By
Joanne P. Baron
AN UNDERGRADUATE THESIS
In
Anthropology
Submitted to the
Department of Anthropology
University of Pennsylvania
Thesis Advisor: Professor Robert Sharer

2006

Sport, Community, and the Ballgame at Yalbac, Belize
Abstract
The Maya ballgame, widely attested through archaeological and historical
sources, was a popular activity among the southern lowland polities of the Late Preclassic
and Classic periods (ca. 300 B.C.-A.D. 900). Traditional interpretations of this game have
seen it as a highly ritualized event, carried out to re-enact certain mythological cycles
dealing with life, death, warfare, and agricultural fertility. These interpretations, however,
often exclude the possibility that the game also functioned as a sport or was similar to
athletic events from other societies, both past and present. Such events are universally
metaphorical for conflict, and are widely popular when played between opposing
commnnities. Archaeological evidence from ball courts in northern Belize, including the
site ofYalbac, indicates that commnnities in this area were actively engaged in intercommunity ballgame competition. This suggests that the Maya ballgame, like sporting
events in other parts of the world, fnnctioned as a means ofreinforcing community
identity.

1

Introduction
Throughout the world, athletic competitions serve many purposes, such as to
provide entertainment, encourage gambling and promote social interaction. Their most
important role, however, is to reinforce the identity of a particular community through
metaphorical conflict with another group. It is this reinforcing quality that makes athletic
events both emotional and often politically charged. The Mesoamerican ballgame is an
example of one such athletic event. Although previous interpretations of this game have
focused on its religious associations and seen it as a highly ritualistic activity, it is likely
that the game also functioned in much the same way as sporting events from other parts
of the world.
The Maya are one of many ethnic groups ofMesoamerica, and, like their
neighbors, played a rubber ballgame that can be documented both archaeologically and
historically. The excavation ofballcourts in the Maya area has enabled scholars to
analyze their formal characteristics, as well as determine which activities took place in
their general vicinity. My work at the ballcourt at Yalbac, Belize, has enabled a
comparison to ballcourts at other Maya sites in the geographic regions of northern Belize.
Through this comparison, ballgame affiliations between polities can be documented and
conclusions drawn about the nature of ballgame competition itself
Not only did the Maya construct courts as venues for the game, they also depicted
it on monuments and ceramics, and wrote about it in inscriptions. Spanish authors at the
time of the conquest were able to document the ballgame among the Maya and their
Mexican neighbors. Forms of the Mesoamerican ballgame are even played today.
Through au examination of these many lines of evidence, a model of the ballgame's

2

significance can be obtained that relates it to the universal properties of athletic
competition.

Yalbac, Belize
The small Maya site ofYalbac is located in the Orange Walk district of northern
Belize between Yalbac Creek and the low Yalbac Hills (Figure 1). The site has been
under investigation by the Valley of Peace Archaeology Project since 2001. It was
mapped in that year and surface ceramics were collected (Lucero 2002). Work continued
in 2002 with the documentation and clearing oflooter's trenches, excavation of two
residential complexes, continued mapping of the site core, and initial settlement survey
(Lucero 2003). The site core contains the small-scale Peten-style architecture typical of
sites in the region, and consists of three plazas, five major pyramidal structures, and an
acropolis (Lucero 2002).
Like the majority of sites in the area, Yalbac contains a ballcourt. A Maya
ballcourt consists of two long parallel structures, the alley between them, and the open
areas at either end, called end zones. At Yalbac, the ballcourt (Structures 2B and 2C) is
attached to the front of Structure 2A, the largest pyramidal structure at the site (Figure 2).
The presence of this ballcourt is in no way remarkable. Numerous ballcourts have been
found at sites throughout the Maya area. The fact that ballcourts are so ubiquitous does
not make the Yalbac ballcourt unworthy of study, however, but rather is an indication of
the widespread importance of these structures for the Maya.

The Mesoamerican Ballgame

3

History of the Ballgame

Maya ballcourts were the formal setting for a game was played with a large solid
rubber ball. The distribution of this ballgame extended far beyond the Maya area.
Ballcourts have been identified throughout Mesoamerica, the Southwestern United
States, the Caribbean Islands (Stem 1950), and even as far away as Peru (Pozorski and
Pozorski 1995). The oldest ballcourt known in the Americas dates to 1400 B.C. and was
found at the site of Paso de la Amada, Chiapas (Hill and Clark 2001 ). A ballcourt that
dates to this early period indicates that the ballgame has long been an important event in
Mesoamerica, and that its establishment coincided with some of the first evidence for
social stratification (Hill and Clark 2001). Iconographic representations of the ballgame
also date to early periods, with ceramic ballplayer figurines from San Lorenzo dating to
as early as 1500 B.C. (Bradley 2001 :34). Rubber balls themselves have been found
archaeologically, the oldest of which, from El Manati in Veracruz, date to 1600 B.C.
(Nadal 2001 :27).
While the exact rules of the game remain unknown, a combination of
ethnographic, historic, and iconographic sources reveal that there were probably a variety
of games played throughout the ballgame's history, each of which may have required
different rules. The ballgames survive today in the form of several varieties played in the
Mexican state of Sinaloa. These games, played by striking a rubber ball with the arm, hip,
and a wooden bat respectively, do not use a masonry court but a flat field which is
marked off with the shoe. The game is scored much like tennis or volleyball, with a
serviug team scoring points off the opposing team's faults (Leynaar 2001). Several
Spanish writers documented the ballgame as it was played at the time of the conquest

4

(Stern 1950). These sources indicate that the ball could be struck with the hip, buttock, or
knee, that the game required great physical endurance and skill, and that players wore
equipment to protect themselves from the dangerously heavy ball (Stern 1950:57-61). As
for the Maya ballgame, iconographic representations generally show small teams or
individuals facing one another, protected by large torso and hip protectors, and knee pads
(Cohodas 1991).
The Ballgame among the Maya
Traditional interpretations of the ballgame's significance for the Classic Maya
have been based largely upon iconographic and epigraphic data. Additionally, scholars
have been able to draw many parallels between Classic period ballplaying themes and the
Postclassic (AD. 900-1492) Maya book, the Popol Vuh. This Quiche creation myth was
recorded by the monk Francisco Ximenez in the early ]8 th century. Ximenez' Popol Vuh
is copied from an earlier manuscript, which in turn was probably copied from an even
older hieroglyphic version (Christenson 2003 :33). Ballgames and ballplayers are
prominently featured in this story, allowing for the religious interpretations of the Classic
ballgame.
One of the most common interpretations of the Classic Maya ballgame was
developed by Linda Schele, (Schele and Miller 1986, Schele 1987, Schele and Friedel
1991, Friedel et al. 1993) who hypothesized that it was an arena for the re-enactment of
the creation myth later recorded in the Popol Vuh. In this story, the Maize God, his
brother, and his twin sons play against the gods of the underworld in a series of
ballgames. The outcomes of these games dictate the sacrifice of the Maize god, the
eventual defeat of the lords of the underworld, and the Maize God's rebirth. According to

5

this interpretation, ballgame events during the Classic period directly referenced these
original ballgames, and likely culminated with human sacrifices designed to perpetuate
the growth cycle of maize. Support for this interpretation can be found in various
examples of ballgame iconography, most notably Yaxchilan Hieroglyphic Stairway 2. A
series of ballgame scenes is represented on this stairway, and the central panel (Figure 3)
tells a story of three mythic "choppings" (or sacrifices) that take place in an underworld
location. In honor of these events, the stairway is named the "Three ConquestNictory
Stair," a name which is also found at Copan, Tonina, and Naranjo in connection with
1

stairways and ballcourts (Schele and Grube 1990, Schele and Friedel 1991, Friedel et al.
1993). Additional support for the Popol Yuh interpretation of ballgame events is found in
the ballcourt markers from Copan and La Esperanza. These markers show lords from
their respective kingdoms impersonating gods from the Popol Yuh story, and re-enacting
specific ballgame episodes from the myth (Schele 1987, Friedel et al. 1993).
Expanding on the theme of ballgame sacrifice, scholars have also interpreted
ballgame events as directly relating to war (Miller and Houston 1987, Gillespie 1991).
According to these interpretations, captives taken in battle may have been forced to take
part in ceremonial re-enactments of the creation myth, in which they served the role of
pre-detennined losers, to be eventually sacrificed through beheading or by being bound
up like the ball itself and thrown to "suffer and die in mock play" (Freidel et al.
1993 :361 ). The Yaxchilan stairway depicts this bizarre form of execution, and it may also
be referenced in a wall panel from La Amelia (Figure 4), on which the name of the king's
ball may refer to his captive (Schele and Grube 1990:3-5). Furthermore, an inscription
from the Naranjo Hieroglyphic Stairway indicates that a ballgame event at Calakmul took

6

this interpretation, ballgame events during the Classic period directly referenced these
original ballgames, and likely culminated with human sacrifices designed to perpetuate
the growth cycle of maize. Support for this interpretation can be found in various
examples of ballgame iconography, most notably Yaxchilan Hieroglyphic Stairway 2. A
series of ballgame scenes is represented on this stairway, and the central panel (Figure 3)
tells a story of three mythic "choppings" (or sacrifices) that take place in an underworld
location. In honor of these events, the stairway is named the "Three Conquest/Victory
Stair," a name which is also found at Copan, Tonina, and Naranjo in connection with
1

stairways and ballcourts (Schele and Grube 1990, Schele and Friedel 1991, Friedel et al.
1993). Additional support for the Popol Vuh interpretation of ballgame events is found in
the ballcourt markers from Copan and La Esperanza. These markers show lords from
their respective kingdoms impersonating gods from the Popol Yuh story, and re-enacting
specific ballgame episodes from the myth (Schele 1987, Friedel et al. 1993).
Expanding on the theme of ballgame sacrifice, scholars have also interpreted
ballgame events as directly relating to war (Miller and Houston 1987, Gillespie 1991).
According to these interpretations, captives taken in battle may have been forced to take
part in ceremonial re-enactments of the creation myth, in which they served the role of
pre-determined losers, to be eventually sacrificed through beheading or by being bound
up like the ball itself and thrown to "suffer and die in mock play" (Freidel et al.
1993:361). The Yaxchilan stairway depicts this bizarre form of execution, and it may also
be referenced in a wall panel from La Amelia (Figure 4), on which the name of the king's
ball may refer to his captive (Schele and Grube 1990:3-5). Furthermore, an inscription
from the Naranjo Hieroglyphic Stairway indicates that a ballgame event at Calakmul took

6

place on the same day as a victory ofCaracol, Calakmul's ally, over a site called Tzam,
perhaps connecting ballplaying to victory in war (Martin and Grube 2000:92).
While these religious/ceremonial interpretations of the Classic Maya ballgame
seem to be strongly supported by these iconographic examples, scholars have sometimes
tended to emphasize religious and ceremonial significance at the expense of other
possible meanings of the ballgame. However, it is quite likely that these events had
multiple meanings depending on when they were played, and who was doing the playing.
While the strong opinion that the Maya ballgame was more than ''.just a game," or a
"mere sport" is held by many scholars, (e.g. Miller and Houston 1987:60, Ferguson
1999:3, Schele and Freidel 1991 :289) this judgment may be true only in certain contexts.
Such diminutive language denies both the many aspects of the game that are strikingly
similar to competitive athletic events from around the world, and the overwhelming
importance of these events in many societies, both past and present. It is not my intention
to either refute those religious interpretations that have been presented by various
scholars, or to suggest that there was a fundamental distinction between religious and
secular interests as there is in modem Western societies. However, it is likely that there
are other possible interpretations of the Maya ballgame that both move beyond the highly
formalized ceremonial models that have been hypothesized, and offer a comparison to
athletic events as they are manifested in other parts of the world.
That scholars have, in recent years, begun to see the Classic Maya ballgame in
new ways is hardly surprising considering the ethnographic and historic examples
available in other parts of Mesoamerica. Spanish sources indicate that the Mexican
ballgame at the time of the conquest was a widely popular source of amusement among

7

both the elite and commoner classes (Stem 1950). Duran (translated by Horcasitas and
Heyden 1971) describes it as, "a highly entertaining game and amusement for the people,
especially for those who held it to be a pastime or entertainment" (p.313). Great numbers
of people could be involved in the game all at the same time: "in the square comers a
great nuruber of players stood on guard to see that the ball did not penetrate. The main
players stood in the center facing the ball" (pp. 314-315) Jones (1985:48) observes that,
"in such a situation, the distinction between participant and spectator would not be
strong."
The ballgame was also a scene of high-stakes gambling. "These wretches played
for stakes of little value or worth, and since the pauper loses quickly what he has, they
were forced to gamble their homes, their fields, their com granaries, their maguey plants"
(Horcasitas and Heyden 1971:318). Ballplayers themselves were not all ritual specialists.
Some were "lords, captains, braves, and important men," while some "played it for
profit. . .lacking instruction in anything else but ballplaying" (Horcasitas and Heyden
1971:315-317).
Spanish sources are less forthcoming about the Maya version of the ballgame.
Landa, the only source that definitively describes the Maya game, notes that it was just
one of many pastimes enjoyed by young men. "[There] they gathered for their pastimes.
They played ball, a certain game with beans like dice, and many others" (Gates 1978:52).
While the Popol Vuh has often been used to point to the religious connotations of the
ballgame, some passages may be best interpreted as referring to the recreational aspects
of the game. Before their fateful journeys to the underworld, the Maize god (One
Hunahpu) and his brother (Seven Hunahpu) play the ballgame apparently for the fun ofit.

8

"As for One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu, they would merely play dice and ball
everyday" (Christenson 2003:113).
There are numerous scene ofballplaying on Maya polochrome ceramic vessels,
many of which do not overtly reference religious ritual. Some of these scenes, for
example, may depict ballgame disputes, argued before a referee. An individual, holding a
conch shell trumpet and elevated above the players, appears to officiate the game, calling
plays in favor of one team or another (Tokovinine n.d.) (Figure 5 a-c). Such disputes, if
that is indeed what is depicted, would seem to be unusual if the ballgame always had a
predetermined loser destined for sacrifice. Rather, they would be consistent with a game
in which money and pride were staked on the outcome.
Archaeological data from the Maya area indicates that ballgames were public
events, likely held for the general enjoyment of the populace. Fox's (1996) important
study of ball courts in Honduras demonstrates that, much like Westem sporting events,
food consumption was an important feature of ballgame entertainment. In addition to the
ballcourts in the study, Fox points to archaeological evidence at ballcourts throughout the
Maya area in his analysis. Recovered artifacts included ceramic fragments from bowls
and jars, obsidian blades, animal bones, andjute shells, all of which point to a prevalence
of food in these areas. Scenes on polychrome ceramic vessels also depict musical
entertainment in the form of maracas and trumpets that accompanied the ballgame
(Zender 2004: 10) (See Figures 5b and 5c ). With these sources of evidence in mind, it is
not difficult to imagine a ballgame as a scene of high stakes, riotous enthusiasm, satisfied
stomachs, and a general good time.

9

How are we to reconcile these competing models of the Maya ballgame? There
were surely some cases in which ballgame events were staged to re-enact important
mythological themes through ritual play and sacrifice. However, there were surely also
times at which sport and entertainment, rather than ceremony, played a key role in the
event. Ballcourt dedication ceremonies are well documented archaeologically (Fox
1996), and it is possible that, since many monumental inscriptions are primarily
dedicatory in nature, the ballgames depicted in monumental sculpture represent
dedication events in which the king performed a series of rituals (Tokovinine 2002:6).
These would include the god impersonations and sacrifices depicted on such monuments,
and would formally dedicate the ballcourt or stairway in question, while not necessarily
serving as a template for ballgame play itself.

Maya ballgames and Maya politics
Another feature of the Maya ballgame is the extent to which it was used by elites
in political contexts, made clear by monumental inscriptions. While ballgame
competitions may have been used to celebrate war, they were also played between
polities that were on friendly terms. The famous "Site Q" ballplayer panels offer a good
example. Ballplayer Panel I (Figure 6) depicts a ballgame between a high-ranking lord of
the powerful site ofCalakmul, and an individual named Chak Ak'ach Yuk, known to be
the king of the subordinate site of La Corona. The text also specifies that the location of
the ballgame was at Calakmul itself (Martin and Grube 2000: 110). The diplomatic
relations between the two sites are well documented (Graham 1997), and it was
undoubtedly these relations that the La Coroua king wished to stress when
commissioning the monument. It is likely that all of the Site Q ballplayer panels were

10

carved primarily to celebrate peaceful ballgames, played between political allies, rather
than a more warlike equivalent.
The carved ballcourt markers from Cancuen also depict ballgames between
apparent political allies. Ballcourt Marker 1 (Figure 7) depicts Cancuen's king, Taj al
Chan Ahk, playing ball with a certain K'an Mame, who would later become king (Zender
and Skidmore 2004). Ballcourt Marker 2, commemorating a dedication event, gives
great prominence to the captor of the kings of Sak Te' and Machaquila, and it is he who
is depicted playing ball. These two sites were enemies of Cancuen, and only after this
capture, apparently, did the Cancuen king usurp the Machaquila emblem glyph and claim
rulership of both sites (Zender and Skidmore 2004). Clearly then, while the ballcourt
markers may have been intended to celebrate military victory, the ballgames they depict
did not involve captives from the sites in question, but rather local, victorious lords.
Depictions of such friendly or diplomatic ballgames do not confine themselves to
monumental carving but can be found on ceramic vessels as well. One clear example
comes from a polychrome vessel depicting a ballgame between two finely dressed
individuals (Figure 8a). Although the rim text of the vessel indicates that it once belonged
to the king of Hix Witz (Figure 8b), one of the ballplaying figures is labeled as the king
ofMotul de San Jose (Figure Sc). In all likelihood, the vessel was painted to
commemorate an important ballgame between the two polities (Miller and Martin
2004:91).
All these images are examples of individual ballgames that were part of a political
or diplomatic process. However, Maya kings were also interested in expressing general
ballgame connections as well. The Mayan root pitz, meaning "to play ball" is often found

11

in association with ballgame scenes in which it serves as a caption to the event being
depicted (Stuart 1987:25). However, the pitz root is found in other contexts as well, and
forms the basis for an elite title, used repeatedly at several sites by specific kings. For
instance, Yaxchilan's Shield Jaguar II is referred to as a 5- "k'atun" pitziil "ballplayer
over 80 years old" in Yaxchilan inscriptions and on Stela I from Dos Caobas (Cougnaud
et al. 2003:5) (Figure 9a-c). The ballplayer title is just one in a string of several 5-K'atun
titles used to refer to this king.
Variations on the pitz epithet are found at other sites as well. The Dos Pilas king
Bajlaj Chan K' awiil is referred to as a bate' pitziil on multiple occasions, a title meaning
"wrestler ballplayer" (Zender 2001) (Figure I 0a,b ). At Palenque, variations on the
ballplayer title describe numerous kings (Figure I la-c), including Kan Balam II, whose
childhood name was apparently aj pitziil oh/, "he of the ballplayer heart," (Figure I ld)
and who is also described as a "k'atun" (young)pitziil at the time of his accession (Figure

I le). Baak-nal Chaak, Kan Balam's contemporary and king of the rival polity ofTonina,
took the title yajawte 'pitziil (yajawte' is an elite title meaning "lord of the tree") (Figure
12). This king was also responsible for the construction of a large ballcourt at Tonina,
decorated with statues of various captives. Labels below each captive, where legible, tell
us that these were vassals of the hostile king Kan Balam of Palenque (Martin and Grube
2000:181) (Figure 13). In a remarkable display of irony, these ballcourt texts refer to Kan
Balam not by his royal name, but simply by his epithet a) pitz, the ballplayer. Although
Kan Balam is not himself displayed as a captive, the monument seems to mock his claim
of ballgame prowess through the revelry in his military defeat.

12

The pitz title, in addition to its explicit use by royalty, is found on ceramic vessels
as well, whose owners also seek to associate themselves with ballplaying activities. One
vessel, for example, possibly painted by an artist from Naranjo (Kerr n.d.), refers to its
owner as an itz 'aat pitziil (itz 'aat being another common title taken by nobility) (Fignre
14). An unusual nnprovenienced alabaster vessel also employs the title with variations
(Figure 15). Its luumil pitziil, bate' pitziil, and kabal pitziil can be translated as "dirty
ballplayer," "wrestler ballplayer" and "earthy ballplayer" respectively (Zender 2001).
Clearly, Maya elites were interested in casting themselves as ballplayers. This
was done through the dedication ofballcourts themselves, as well as prominently
displaying scenes in which they conducted ballgame ceremonies, played ball against
other high-ranking members of society, and even through the explicit description of
certain individuals as ballplayers. But, as we have seen, the ballgame was not exclusively
played in reference to religious themes. Rather, it was also an important source of
entertainment in the lives of elite and commoner alike. Why, then, do Maya lords place
such a high emphasis on this event and seek to so readily associate themselves with it?
Fox (1996) offers one possible explanation for this phenomenon. Pointing to a
strong link between ballgame events and food consumption, he suggest that ballgame
rituals may have been a form of competitive generosity. The lords who sponsored such
events hoped to gain prestige and respect in the eyes of their subjects and their peers
through the ability to provide a good time. He points out that 'The effectiveness of such
public display efforts is partly contingent on the sponsors' ability to impress others
through pomp and pageantry" (Fox 1996:494). Hill and Clark (2001), on the other hand,
argue that, "the accumulation of symbolic capital and social prestige appears to have been

13

an important ingredient [of political power], but insufficient by itself. All paths to
potential heritable power have the possibility of differential control of material goods, but
these required investment and manipulation in particular ways to defeat the egalitarian
system" (p. 341). Citing the close spatial and chronological connection between the first
known ballcourt in Mesoamerica and the beginning of social stratification at Paso de la
Amada, Hill and Clark suggest that the ballcourt served as a material means of seizing
power. They suggest that the ownership of the ballcourt, along with the control of
gambling debts, may have led to a differentiation of material wealth that brought about a
differentiation in social status.
Furthermore, Hill and Clark (2001) suggest that the beginning ofballcourts in
Mesoamerica led to the first inter-village competition, which in tum built a sense of
community based on support for the village team and in opposition to other communities.
From this sense of community, a concept they call Communitas, the individual who
controlled the ballcourt would have emerged as a representative of the community for
both visitors and locals alike. This may have contributed to the transition from achieved
status to ascribed status in these communities. This argument, however, is based upon the
assumption that other villages near Paso de la Amada built their own ballcourts as well.
The authors point out, "the presence of just one ballcourt in the region is as illogical as
wearing only one shoe" (p. 342).
By the Late Preclassic period (ca. 400 BC-AD 250), both the ballgame and divine
kingship were imbedded traditions within Maya society and the emergence of social
stratification and heritable power were no longer at stake by this time. The fact remains,
however, that even several thousand years after the construction of the first known

14

ballcourt in Mesoamerica, Maya elites were still just as interested in associating
themselves with the ballgame as were their distant elite predecessors. It seems simplistic
to argue that at this late stage the ballgame alone was responsible for the continuation of
the institution of kingship. However, the role of Communitas and its manifestation
through inter-polity ballgame competition could indeed have played a role in the fortunes
of individual rulers.
How did this process play itself out at Yalbac? No monumental texts have ever
been found there, so we have no way of knowing the personal ambitions of its rulers.
However, like the excavators of Paso de la Amada, we have the ballcourt itself.
Excavations at the ballcourt provide information about the beginnings of the ballgame at
Yalbac, its popularity through time, its locus in relation to other features at the site, and
activities which may have gone on in its general vicinity. And unlike the excavators of
Paso de la Amada, we have numerous other ballcourts to which the Yalbac ballcourt can
be compared. Through this comparison, we can look for evidence of inter-site
competition, which is, according to Hill and Clark, they key to Communitas.

Ballcourts of Belize
Ballcourt Description and Classification
There are numerous sites in Belize that contain ballcourts; in fact, sites without
them are rare. Ballcourts in general display a surprising diversity which has caused
various scholars to classify them according to broad typologies. Such categorization was
undoubtedly easier when fewer ballcourts were known, and the great number and variety
that have since been described complicates the situation. Blom (1932) made one such

15

attempt by developing a typology for 32 ballcourts from the Maya area. The important
features in Blom's classificatory system were the angle of the ballcourt's side walls, as
well as the material of which the ballcourt's rings were made. (Based on the example of
the Great Ballcourt at Chichen Itza, Blom assumed that all ballcourts originally had rings,
and the lack thereof at many Maya sites indicated to him that they originally must have
been perishable.) Blom also noted that all the ballcourts in the sample had a "low terrace"
as well as a "stone-clad slope, from terrace to floor of the court" (Blom 1932:513).
Finally, he stated that "there is no rule as to how the ball-courts are placed in relation to
cardinal points" (Blom 1932:513).
Acosta and Koer (1946) refined this classification with the definition of three
important ballcourt features: the banqueta, gran talud, and paramento. The banqueta is
described as a small platform above the floor of the ballcourt alley. The gran talud is the
sloping surface that rises above the banqueta and, they believe, was the most important
feature in ballgame play. Finally, the paramento was the high wall, usually vertical,
above the gran talud. According to this classification, Type A ballcourts had all three
features, whereas Types B and C lacked a banqueta and a gran talud respectively.
Smith (1961) considered even more features and expanded his typology to include
five ballcourt types. The characteristics of the ballcourt's inner profile remained
important, and Smith defined two features thereof: the bench (equivalent to Acosta and
Koer's banqueta) and the playing wall (equivalent to the gran talud or paramento,
depending on whether the wall was sloping or vertical). Additionally, he noted the
presence in some cases of vertical molding above such sloping surfaces. Finally, Smith
accounted for the demarcation of end zones, defining two types of open-ended courts,

16

two types of enclosed courts, and one type with no end zones at all. Additionally, Smith
was wise enough to include a sixth category, miscellaneous, for all those ballcourts which
were still indefinable.
The most recent attempt at classifying Mesoamerican ballcourts was made by
Taladoire (1981). He further changed terminology by defining the ballcourt bench, apron
(Acosta and Koer's gran talud) and Cornice (a vertical face equivalent to the paramento,
playing wall, or vertical molding). Taladoire's typology covered a large geographical and
chronological range, spanning Mesoamerica from the American Southwest to the
Caribbean Islands, and the Middle Preclassic to Postclassic periods.
Problems with these classifications abound. First, strict definitions ofballcourt
features do not take into account the broad range of forms present. For instance, how
does one define a bench/banqueta/low terrace? According to Blom, Acosta and Koer, and
Taladoire, it must always be a flat surface, but Smith describes one of this types as
possessing a sloping bench top. Furthermore, how does one draw a line between a gran
talud and a playing wall/cornice? According to Smith, playing walls can be vertical or
sloping. Secondly, such studies attempt to bring literally thousands ofballcourts under a
single classification scheme. Since Taladoire's (1981) study, the number ofballcourts
identified archaeologically throughout Mesoamerica has increased drastically (Taladoire
2001). As more ballcourts are discovered every year, the overwhelming diversity of
ballcourt forms becomes increasingly apparent, as does the sample size with which to test
certain classifications.
A better understanding ofballcourt forms is produced by studies that focus on
smaller regions. Such studies (e.g. Scarborough 1991, Fox 1991) facilitate the recognition

17

of localized chronological and architectural patterns and attempt to define those features
which are important in a particular region. Where regional standardization does exist, it is
likely indicative of the peculiarities of ballgame play in that particular area. For instance,
large ballcourts in one region may indicate a style of play that necessitated more
movement or a larger number of players, whereas smaller ballcourts in a neighboring
region may indicate more restricted movement or a smaller number of players. By
focusing on those features which are emphasized locally, not only can an understanding
be achieved of the particulars of ballgame play in that area, but those areas can be defined
that were regularly engaged in inter-site ballgame competition. The more localized these
studies become, the greater our understanding will be of the ballgame's role within the
social and political landscape of each region.
If one is to focus on local patterns in ball court construction, how does Y albac' s
ballcourt fit into building trends in northern Belize? The Yalbac site core is located about
four kilometers south of the Yalbac Hills, which form a natural boundary between the
Belize River Valley to the south, and the Three Rivers Region to the north (Figure I).
The Belize River Valley is defined by the settlement in the foothills along the Mopan and
Macal Rivers, and on the alluvial plain to the east, where the confluence of these two
rivers forms the Belize River (Chase and Garber 2004). The Three Rivers Region to the
north is more loosely defined as the area between the floodplains of the Rio Azul to the
north and west, and by Booth's River to the east. While the site of Chan Chich has
previously arbitrarily set the southern margin of this region (Sullivan and Sagebiel 2003),
I consider San Jose to be part of this area as well. Yalbac's particular location at the very
juncture between these two regions makes it geographically unique, and it is unknown

18

which area played a more dominant role in Yalbac's political orientation. Since ballgame
competition was an important arena for social and political interaction, ballcourt variation
may indicate which of these adjacent regions was more important to Yalbac's
development.
If this is a viable line of inquiry, however, it must be demonstrated that the two
neighboring regions display significant regional differences in ballcourt construction. To
define ballcourt variability, I have focused on several attributes. These include
quantitative measurements such as 1) the length of the ballcourt alley as defined by the
length of the ballcourt's structures, 2) the width of the alley 3) the height of the structures
and 4) the cardinal orientation of the ballcourt alley2.
Other attributes I examined were more qualitative, such as 5) chronology of
ballcourt construction and use and 6) the profile of the internally-facing walls of the
parallel structures. While the ballcourts of the Three Rivers Region vary considerably in
this regard, the ballcourts of the Belize Valley are far more regular. For this reason, I
have adopted the following terminology to describe Belize Valley ballcourts: a bench
face refers to the first surface encountered above the alley floor. It is either vertical or
sloping. A bench top is a flat or slightly sloping surface above the bench face that extends
away from the center of the alley. A playing wall is a vertical or steeply sloping surface
that rises above the bench top. Such easy definitions are not viable for the description of
ballcourts in the Three Rivers Region, and therefore I have described each surface
individually, sometimes making comparisons to the Belize Valley terminology.
The features I have chosen to examine were selected based on the assumption that
they wonld affect actnal ballgame play. For instance, the length and width of the alley

19

would determine the amount of movement possible during a game. The height of the
structures as well as the profiles of the various playing surfaces would determine the
ways in which the ball would bounce ifit were struck against them. The orientation of the
ballcourt alley might have influenced the times of day at which a ballgame would be
possible (nobody wants to play with the sun in their eyes). Finally, the chronology of the
ballcourt is important to determine the ballgame's popularity through time.

Belize River Valley Ballcourts
The present study is not the first to thoroughly examine the ballcourts of the
Belize River Valley. In her examinations of the ballcourts of Baking Pot, Ferguson
(1999) provides a catalogue, brief description, and analysis of the ballcourts in the Belize
Valley. While using additional sources where possible, I used this catalogue as my
primary source for ballcourts in the region. I added one additional ballcourt to the list,
located at the site of Saturday Creek and excavated by the Valley of Peace Archaeology
Project in 2001 (Jeakle et al. 2002). In total I examined 19 ballcourts at 13 sites in the
Belize River Valley (See Appendix A for a description of these ballcourts).
The quantitative attributes of the ballcourts of the Belize River Valley are easily
described and analyzed. The lengths and widths oftheballcourt alleys of all 19 ballcourts
were collected, either through examination of site maps, or by the description of
excavators. The ballcourt alleys were nearly all 10 min length or longer, with the
exception of the ballcourt from North Caracol Farm. This ballcourt alley measured only 5
min length, which seems extremely anomalous. For this reason, alley lengths were
analyzed twice, once including North Caracol Farm, and once excluding it from analysis.
Heights of the structures were harder to come by, as site plans do not commonly

20

indicate the heights of various structures. Only 10 heights were collected. The orientation
of ballcourt structures was also collected for all 19 ballcourts. Of all the ballcourts in the
Belize River Valley, only one at Baking Pot was oriented generally east-west, while the
rest were aligned generally north-south. For this reason, two analyses of orientation were
conducted. The first was based upon all 19 ballcourts, with the east-west ballcourt at
Baking Pot adding considerable variation to the saruple. The second analysis excluded
this ballcourt altogether, and only examined those ballcourts aligned generally northsonth.
The raw data collected from ballcourts in the Belize River Valley are as follows:

Site Name
Actuncan
Baking Pot 1
Baking Pot 2
Baking Pot 3
Blackman Eddy
Buenavista 1
Buenavista 2
Cahal Pech 1
Cahal Pech 2
El Pilar 1
El Pilar 2
Las Ruinas
North Caracol Farm
Ontario Village
Pacbitun
Saturday Creek
X-ual-canil
Xunantunich 1
Xunantunich 2

Alley Length
16
19
19
20
17
24
21
16
15
15
10
13
5
15
17.5
26
14
10
15

Alley Width
3.75
3.15
4.5
5.5
6
6
3
4
3
5.5
8
5
2
5
4.8
5
5
4
5.5

Structure Height

Orientation
2.6
1.6

4.5
2

2
2
3.5
2.4
1
1.13

82
98
85
66
76
76
90
95
90
93
90
92
76
80
73
78
78

The sample size (n), mean (x), standard deviation (s), and coefficient of
1

variation (cv) for each attribute are listed below.
Alley Length (all ballconrts)
21

n=l9

x =16.2
s=4.92
cv=30.4%
Alley Length (excluding North Caracol Farm)
n=l8
x =16.8
s=4.23
cv=25.1%
Alley Width
n=l9

x=4.7
s=l.37
cv=29.4%
Structure Height
n=IO

x=2Ao
s=l.10
cv=45.7%
Orientation (all ballcourts)
n=l9
x =87.6
s=20.81
cv=23.8%
Orientation (north-south ballcourts only)
n=l8
x=83.2
s=8.76
cv=I0.5%
As can be seen by these data, most attributes are highly variable. Although the
exclusion of North Caracol Fann in the length analysis did lower the coefficient of
variation for that attribute, it did not greatly change the mean or standard deviation. The
exclusion of the east-west Baking Pot ballcourt, however, created more dramatic results.
Both the standard deviation and coefficient of variation were significantly reduced, and
the mean shifted nearly five degrees westward.

22

The qualitative attributes of the ballcourts of the Belize River Valley are more
complicated. Most of the ballcourts in the region were constructed during the Late
Classic period. There are others, however, that were built during the Late Preclassic and
were refurbished during subsequent centuries. The five Preclassic ballcourts in the Belize
River Valley include those at Actuncan, Pacbitun, Saturday Creek, the South Ballcourt at
Buenavista, and the Eastern Ballcourt at El Pilar. Of these five ballcourts, only two
survived into the Early Classic period. Both the South Ballcourt at Buenavista and the
ballcourt at Pacbitun were replastered during this period, though no major architectural
construction took place. The only ballcourt that can be definitively said to have been
initiated during the Early Classic period was that at Las Ruinas de Arena!. Thus it is clear
that during the Early Classic, ballcourt construction in the Belize River Valley was not as
high a priority as in previous centuries.
During the Late and Terminal Classic periods, however, ballcourts in the Belize
River Valley enjoyed a resurgence of popularity. Ballcourts previously built at Actuncan,
Pacbitun and Saturday Creek were rebuilt at this time, and new ballcourts sprang up
everywhere. These included the three ballcourts at Baking Pot, both ballcourts at Cahal
Pech, and those at North Caracol Farm, Ontario Village, X-ual-canil, and Ballcourt 2 at
Xunantunich. Additionally, the South Ballcourt at Buenavista was terminated and the
brand new North ballcourt was built in its stead.
Ballcourt profiles in the Belize River Valley show remarkable standardization and
stability through time. In general, the profile of a ballcourt in the Belize River Valley
consists of a bench face, bench top, and playing wall. Bench faces vary, both in slope and
in height (reported heights all fell between .5 and 1 m high). Bench tops in the Belize

23

River Valley, although not all completely horizontal, are not steeply sloped. The highest
reported slope of a bench top in this region is the 17 degree slope at Ontario Village.
Most others were reported as horizontal or slightly sloping. Above the bench tops rose
playing walls, which were generally vertical or nearly so. The Eastern Ballcourt at Cahal
Pech and Ballcourt 2 at Xunantunich had 80 degree and 65 degree playing walls
respectively. The ballcourt at Pacbitun, however, was originally built with a 45 degree
playing wall. While this is still a relatively steep angle, it was nevertheless increased
during the Late Classic period with the construction of a new vertical wall at the juncture
between the bench top and playing wall. While this new wall did not extend to the
structure's summit, it had the effect of creating a steeper playing surface, common at
other ballcourts in the area. Only one ballcourt, at Saturday Creek, did not have a playing
wall.
The effect created by the juncture of a (nearly) horizontal bench top with a
(nearly) vertical playing wall emphasizes the height of the latter, as well as the restricting
angle between them. Steeper benches would reduce this effect and make the angle
between the surfaces less abrupt. To compare this effect to the ballcourts of the Three
Rivers Region, I have attempted to quantify these characteristics by comparing the
heights of the playing walls. However, it is difficult to make this comparison with
ballcourts that are themselves different heights. Therefore, where possible, I have
calculated playing wall height as a percentage of the total structure height. Saturday
Creek was excluded from this analysis because it has no playing wall. At Baking Pot's IID ballcourt, this ratio was about 60 percent. Although the other two ballcourts at Baking
Pot were not as precisely described, they were both compared to the II-D ballcourt, so I

24

assume that this ratio is similar. At Actuncan, ( as indicated by McGovern 1993 fig. 5)
Cahal Pech's Eastern Ballcourt, and Pacbitun, this ratio was even higher at 80 percent.
(The Pacbitun ratio was reduced in the Late Classic but only due to the fact that the new
vertical wall did not reach the top of the structure. If one takes into account the older
playing wall remaining above this surface, the ratio remains about the same.) The playing
wall to structure height ratio was the highest at Xunantunich's Ballcourt 2, at 90 percent.
All these numbers well exceed fifty percent, and it is likely that other ballcourts,
whose statistics could not be precisely determined, would show similarly high ratios. The
only exception to this general principle was the ballcourt at Ontario Village, whose
relatively steeply sloped bench top (17 degrees) met its playing wall at a higher point.
This ratio was a mere 25 percent. While this type of analysis is a peculiar way of
describing ballcourts in one particular region, it will become useful when the profiles of
ballcourts in the Three Rivers Region are examined. As can be seen from the descriptions
in Appendix B below, the Three Rivers Region ballcourts are not as highly standardized,
but can also be described and compared using the same type of analysis.

Three Rivers Region Bal/courts
Although more ballcourts seem to be discovered every year in the Three Rivers
Region, I included 20 ballcourts at 16 sites in my analysis (See Appendix B for ballcourt
descriptions). Like those of the Belize River Valley, the Ballcourts of the Three Rivers
Region were analyzed both statistically and qualitatively. Whereas only a single ballcourt
in the Belize Valley was oriented east-west, three were constructed with this orientation
in the Three Rivers Region. Once again two analyses were conducted on the orientation

25

data, one including the east-west ballcourts, the other excluding them. The raw data are
as follows:
Site Name
Blue Creek
Chan Chich
Chawak But'o'ob
Chochkitam
Dos Hombres 1
Dos Hombres 2
E'kenha
Gran Cacao
lxno' Ha
Kakabish
Kinal
La Honradez
La Honradez
La Milpa North
La Milpa South
Maax Na
Punta de Cacao
Quam Hill
RioAzul
San Jose

Alley Length
19
28
16
16
18
11
16.5
16.5
12.5
20
20
20
26
19
17.5
19
16
17
17

Alley Width
6
10
8
4
4
3
8.7
3.5
7
7
4
4
7
5
5
11
10
6.5
5

Structure Height
4.3

3
2

Orientation
85.5
84
90
90
90
100

3.5
1.4
86
115
100
2.5
5.5
2

4

95

87
102
93

The same four statistical variables will be used in the analysis of the Three Rivers Region
ballcourts.

Alley Length
n=l9

x =18.2

s=3.92
cv=2l.6%
Alley Width
n=I9
x =6.2
s=3.92
cv=38.6%
Structure Height
n=9
x=3.I
s=l.32

26

cv=42.0%

Orientation (all ballcourts)
n =19
x =90.0
s=32.16
cv=35.8
Orientation (north-south ballcourts only)
n=I6

x =94.9
s=8.5

cv=9.0%

The quantitative attributes described in the Three Rivers Region are highly
variable. But, as in the Belize River Valley, the reanalysis ofballcourt orientation proved
useful, considerably reducing the variation in each sample and moving the mean
orientation five degrees eastward. Unlike the ballcourts of the Belize River Valley, none
of the 20 ballcourts of the Three Rivers Region was dated to the Late Preclassic period.
The two earliest ballcourts that have been dated thus far are located at Blue Creek and
Ixno Ha', and both date to the Early Classic period. During the Late and Terminal Classic
periods, like its neighboring region to the South, the Three Rivers Region seems to have
become host to more ballcourt construction, with nine new ballcourts dating to these
periods.
The structural profiles of the ballcourts of the Three Rivers Region were highly
variable. Although some resembled those of the Belize River Valley in the presence of
flat benches or steep playing walls, there was far less consistency in the Three Rivers
Region structural profiles. The degree of slope of the various playing surfaces varied
considerably throughout the region. However, the ballcourts in the Three Rivers Region
lacked the general emphasis on the dichotomy between flat benches and high vertical

27

playing walls. To demonstrate the lack of this feature, I calculated the ratio between the
overall height of the ballcourt structures to the height of the vertical or near vertical walls
exposed for play for comparison to the Belize River Valley. For the purposes of this
analysis, any angles greater than 50 degrees were considered near vertical. While the
analysis of the Belize Valley ballcourts considered the 45 degree slope at Pacbitun to be
generally vertical, this was allowed because a) it was the extreme outlier and b) it was
modified in subsequent phases to express a greater vertical emphasis. For those ballcourts
with multiple tiers such as Chan Chich phase I, Gran Cacao and Dos Hombres Ballcourt
I, I have excluded the upper tier, since it is likely that upper walls supported structures
and were not used in ballgame play. Where bench faces are present I have also excluded
these, as I did for the Belize Valley.
The percentages in the Three Rivers Region were generally far lower than in the
Belize River Valley. Some ballcourts such as Ballcourt 2 at La Milpa and the Maax Na
ballcourt had no vertical surfaces at all. The La Milpa ballcourt strongly resembled the
outlier at Ontario Village in the Belize Valley with a 17 degree sloping surface, a short
vertical wall, and a ratio of 30 percent. The Chan Chi ch ballcourt had a 25 percent ratio
in its first phase which was reduced to 9 percent in its second phase. The ratio at Dos
Hombres Ballcourt I was 28 percent, and at Gran Cacao and San Jose it was 43 percent
and 40 percent respectively. The only ballcourt in the region to exceed 50 percent was the
Dos Hombres 2 ballcourt. The total height of the vertical wall on that ballcourt was not
determined, but if one assumes that it reached the top of the structure, the ratio would be
68 percent. It is clear from these numbers that high steep surfaces were not as important

28

in ballcourt construction in the Three Rivers Region as they were in the Belize River
Valley.

Analysis
To determine whether there were statistically significant differences between the
quantitative attributes of the two regions, t-tests were conducted for each attribute. It was
hypothesized that the two samples would represented different populations, and a (the
probability ofrejecting a true null hypothesis) was set at .05.

Alley Length (all ballcourts)
t=l.61; dp36;p>.05
Ho was not rejected (the difference was not significant).
Alley Length (excluding North Caracol Farm)
t=I.13; dp35;p>.05
Ho was not rejected (the difference was not significant).
Alley Width
t=2.36; dp36;p<.05
Ho was rejected (the difference was significant).
Structure Height
t=l.26; dpl 7;p>.05
Ho was not rejected (the difference was not significant).
Orientation (all ballcourts)
t=.273; dp36;p>.05
H 0 was not rejected (the difference was not significant).
Orientation (north-south ballcourts only)
t=3.92; dp32;p<.05
Ho was rejected (the difference was significant).
As indicated above, two of these analyses yielded significant results. Ballcourts in
the Belize River Valley had significantly narrower playing alleys than those in the Three
Rivers Region. While it is tempting to conclude that this significance is a reflection of
true differences in playing or building style, caution must be taken. In both regions, alley

29

widths had high coefficients of variation (29.4% and 38.6% variation respectively). Like
the Belize River Valley, the Three Rivers Region contained ballcourts with restrictively
narrow playing alleys. However, wide alleys also existed in this region, producing a
greater range, higher variation, and skewing the mean width. I believe that it is unlikely
that the difference in alley widths is truly noteworthy.
The differences in orientation, however, caunot be so easily discounted. When
taking all ballcourts into consideration, those few east-west ballcourts in each region
introduce substantial variation into the sample. However, a reminder is in order that in
both regions, east-west running ballcourts are the exception, and north-south ballcourts
the overwhelming rule. Ifwe are only to evaluate those ballcourts which are oriented
north-south, variation within each sample is substantially reduced. The mean orientation
for north-south Belize Valley is 83 .2 degrees, while those of the Three Rivers region have
a mean orientation of 94.9. This represents a mean difference of over 12 degrees.
However, these particular 12 degrees lie on either side of true north, which may carry
extra importance. The fact that ballcourts in one region are generally oriented just east of
north and oriented just west of north in the other region is suggestive of intentional
planning.
But why these specific orientations? There are several possible explanations. One
is that ball court orientation reflects the overall orientation of buildings within a particular
site or group, and that cardinal directions has nothing to do with ballplaying whatsoever.
While this may be true in some cases, there are examples within the data set where
ballcourts are isolated or where their orientations do not match those of nearby
architecture.

30

Taking practical purposes into consideration, if one wanted to avoid the situation
in which a ballplayer or team faced into the sun, north-south ballcourts would certainly
be more useful than east-west ballcourts. Beyond these generalities, offsetting a ballcourt
a few degrees from north would have additional advantages at certain times of the year.
For instance, at a Belize River Valley ballcourt, oriented several degrees west of north,
the south-facing ballplayer could avoid being blinded on those evenings when the sun
was relatively low in the sky (December). Similarly, ballplayers of the Three Rivers
Region could avoid such difficulties on December mornings by skewing ballcourts
several degrees east of north. The reverse is of course true on mornings and evenings in
June as well. These observations point to a possibility that the differences in ballcourt
orientation are a reflection of specific times of day or year in which the ballgame was
regularly played in each region4.
Chronologically speaking, ballcourts appear in the Belize River Valley earlier
than they do in the Three Rivers Region. Six Preclassic ballcourts have been found in the
former, and none in the latter. The relative paucity of courts during the Early Classic
period is similar in both regions. Ballcourts existed during this time, but they were far
from common and little effort was invested in their construction or upkeep. During the
Late Classic, however, both regions experienced a surge in ballcourt building, and the
game presumably became a popular event throughout both areas.
But while popularity ofballcourts through time was similar in both regions, the
formal characteristics of these ballcourts varied considerably. The highly standardized
ballcourts of the Belize River Valley, with their relatively flat, wide benches and steep
playing walls differed from the more variable ballcourts of the Three Rivers Region with

31

their gentler slopes and shorter walls. As previous classification systems have
acknowledged, the profile of the ballcourt structures was possibly the most important
feature defining the nature of the ballcourt. As the heavy rubber ball was bounced
between opposing teams, the surfaces that it struck would have been the primary
determinant in the speed and direction of the bounce. High playing walls would have
favored a particular type of ricochet, whereas shorter playing walls would have restricted
the incidence of this phenomenon. Similarly, wide, flat benches would have affected play
differently than the steeper slopes found at many sites in the Three Rivers Region. It is
impossible to understand all the nuances ofthis variation without being a ballplayer, and
without knowing exactly how the game was played, but it must nevertheless be
acknowledged as significant.

Yalbac Ballcourt Excavations
Since variation exists between the two regions immediately north and south of
Yalbac, examination of the ballcourt features at Yalbac should offer an indication of the
area with which it more closely interacted, at least in the sphere of ballgame competition.
Excavation at the Yalbac ballcourt began in 2002, but poor weather conditions in that
year prevented substantial progress (Lucero 2003). Excavations continued in 2003 with a
3-x-1-m test unit that was opened between the parallel ballcourt structures 2B and 2C.
The purpose of this excavation was to find the alley floor and, it was hoped, a ballcourt
marker. For this reason the excavation unit was placed in the center of the alley,
perpendicular to Structures 2B and 2C. Excavation revealed collapse debris (strata 102
and 103) as well as a series of plaster floors (104 through 107). Finally, clay fill (108)

32

and a cut plaster floor (109) were exposed before excavations ended for the season
(Lucero 2004).
I joined the Valley of Peace Archaeology project in the summer of2004 as a
student through New Mexico State University's archaeology field school. During that
season I completed the ballcourt alley excavation with the help of Zedekiah Scott of
Valley of Peace Village, Belize. The ballcourt excavations in 2005, completed by myself
with the help of Mr. Scott and several field school students, focused on the ballcourt's
profile, its relationship to an abutting structure, and evidence of ritual activity. The results
of the 2004 and 2005 seasons at the ballcourt have already been prepared for publication
in the respective field reports of those two seasons (Baron 2005, 2006a). Additionally,
data from both seasons was presented in an article for the forthcoming volume of the
Research Reports in Belizean Archaeology (Baron 2006b ). The following sections will
draw heavily from these three publications.
2004 Excavations. The 2004 excavations continued where 2003 had left off with a
l-x-2.75-m unit. After removing the backdirt and plastic from the 2003 season, we found
that much of plaster floor 109 had deteriorated due to the rain in 2003, and we were left
with only a small patch of plaster and the ballast stones for the floor on the western end
of the unit. Excavation beneath the ballast stones of floor 109, revealed a thin layer of
clay which yielded a piece of cut stone, a piece of bone, and several pieces of porous
limestone which we are tentatively identifying as speleothem fragments.
Stratum 108, the clay fill identified in 2003, which overlaid floor 109, was heavily
burned east of the remaining ballast stones. The stratum yielded a series of burnt
materials, all of which were patchy and uneven. Although we separated the burning into

33

three layers for analysis, it is likely that these layers represent a single heavy burning
event. The uppermost of these layers showed large burned patches, the second layer
yielded smaller areas, while in the lowest layer they were smaller still, with the exception
of a heavily burned strip four centimeters wide running lengthwise through the middle of
the ballcourt alley. Such heavy burning events at !"1aya sites usually represent termination
rituals that were carried out when a structure was going out of use, or was being
renovated.
Under strata 108 and 109, we identified another layer of clay fill, stratum 110.
This fill would have originally separated floor 109 from the earlier floor 113 below it.
This plaster of this floor is thick, especially on the east end of the unit. The floor appears
to have been cut or broken because it has a distinct edge protruding for most of its length
about a centimeter from the south wall of the unit. While following floor 113 we
discovered a plastered step (stratum 112) rising 20 cm above the floor. The plaster of this
step was well preserved, and covered several foundation boulders. The largest of these
was a smooth, hard river stone, unlike most of the soft, porous limestone usually found. It
was encased by plaster and large pieces of hard limestone.
To get a better idea of stratum 112, we expanded the unit half a meter eastward,
and found that the step sloped gradually upward. Removing the plaster exposed more
boulder sized stones, most of them limestone, but river stones as well (stratum 115).
Because the large stones of 115 were covered by the thick plaster of 112, we concluded
that we had uncovered the bench of an earlier ba!lcourt. This was an important discovery,
because it indicated that even the earliest construction in this area had been used as a
ballcourt.

34

Under stratum 115 and floor 113 was stratum 114 which consisted of pebble
ballast stones and a clay fill. The plaster floor 113 and the ballcourt bench were built
continuously on top of this fill. Under stratum 114 we encountered natural soil (stratum
116), a light gray clay mixed with chunks of limestone. This layer was not at all level and
it appears as if stratum 114 was the first cultural layer (representing the initial
construction event), used to level out the natural ground surface before any construction
began.
Stratigraphy and ceramic evidence indicate that were three overarching phases in
the construction of the ballcourt at Yalbac (see Table 1, Figure 16). The first, represented
by floor 113 and ballcourt architecture 115/112, took place between 300 and 100 B.C.
during the Late Preclassic period. That the initial floor and ballcourt bench are related is
clear because there is no break between the plaster of the floor and the plaster of the
bench face. The floor and the bench were built on top of clay fill 114, used to level out
the uneven natural ground surface. Later, during the same time period, clay fill 110 was
added on top of floor 113. This leveled the ball court alley for a new construction: floor
109.
As late as A.D. 250, floor 109 was covered with clay fill 108 and one, or a series
of burning events took place during this process. Burned layers were found throughout
fill 108, but floor 109 was only present in a small part of the unit, having either been cut
through, or having dissolved. At the same time, the first floors were constructed in the
rest of the plaza, so it is possible that the ballcourt was ritually terminated in association
with new construction developments at the site. Following the burning of 108, the
ballcourt remained unaltered for the duration of the Early Classic period. A third and

35

final major phase of construction took place in the Late Classic period, when a series of
floors was built on top of 108. Floors 106 and 105 were added first but poor construction
caused them to slant toward the center of the playing alley. Both floors were covered by
floor 104 without an intervening layer of fill (Lucero 2004). These three floors represent
the final major phase of construction at the ballcourt and correspond to the final phase of
structures 2B and 2C, investigated in 2005.

2005 Excavations. Excavations in 2005 were designed to expose the terminal
architecture ofballcourt structures 2B and 2C. This was accomplished with a series of
axial trenches across both structures and through the center of the alley (Figure 17). The
greatest effort was focused on a 2-x-9-m trench running from the estimated area of
juncture between Structures 2A and 2B to the estimated eastern edge of Structure 2B.
This trench was divided into four 2-x-2-m units and one l-x-2-m unit, numbered 1-5.
This placement paiiially overlapped the original trench from the 2002 season. To the
south of this trench was placed another, unit 6, measuring 3-x-1 m, to expose more of the
sloping playing wall. This trench was confined to the eastward, basal portion of Structure
2B and did not continue above the sloping surface. A l-x-6.5-m trench (unit 7) was
opened in Structure 2C to fully establish the parallel, mirror-image nature of the
structures and support the final conclusion that these structures together comprise a
ballcourt. Finally, for clarification of the base of each structure, units 7 and 5 were
connected with one final unit, (number 8) which was an eastward extension of units 5 and
6, and a narrow (.5 m wide) trench along the alley floor.
In order to understand the nature of the ballcourt's terminal phase construction,
excavation was designed to simply expose the architecture of structures 2B and 2C.

36

However, the excavators of the ballcourt trench in 2002 had mistaken architectural layers
for collapse and removed them. The area of this removal corresponded to the center of
our units 4, 5 and 8. The internal layers of Structure 2B were therefore also included in
analysis. Fortunately, the original trench was only I m wide, so intact strata were left on
either side of the removed section and could be documented by the 2005 trench. The end
result was an exposed profile of the fill behind the sloping playing wall and the
foundation underneath it (Figure 18). Based upon the 2002 excavations and the trenches
on Structure 2B, conclusions could be drawn about the construction of the ballcourt's
terminal phase.
Excavation revealed a line of small boulders on top of the plastered playing alley,
which formed a low step only about 20 cm tall. Most of these stones were no longer
present in unit 8, possibly having been removed in 2002. Above these stones was a layer
of cobbles set in mortar (Stratum 110) about 20 or 30 cm thick. This stratum was best
exposed on a narrow line between units 5 and 6, since elsewhere it was covered in cobble
facing stones or collapse. Above the layer of cobbles was a layer of large, flat boulders
set in mortar (Stratum 108). The eastern edge of these flat stones was set back by 20-30
cm from the first line of small boulders to account for the sloping of the playing wall.
These three layers apparently made up the foundation of Structure 2B and may have
continued westward all the way under the structure.
Above the flat stones set in mortar was piled dry fill of stones of all sizes, from
large boulders to small pebbles (Stratum 106). It was this fill that was removed in 2002 in
the center of the trench. The fill was piled to form the sloping wall of the playing alley,
which was then covered with a layer of facing stones (Stratum 103b), continuing all the

37

way down to the level of the first foundation layer, the line of small boulders. The
resulting slope rose above the alley at an angle of about 30 and ended about 2 m above
and 3 m west of the edge of the alley. Unfortunately, the placement of the cut facing
stones of Stratum I 03b was not entirely clear after excavation. They had been removed
entirely within the area of the 2002 trench, and on either side of this area, the facing
stones seem to have slid away, piling up at the bottom of the sloping wall. In unit 6, some
of the Stratum 103b facing stones seem to have remained in place (Figure 19). Judging
from this unit, the facing stones of the sloping wall were probably set in a stepped-back
formation and then covered in plaster. However, the cut stones recovered from unit 6
were not well lodged in place, and the possibility remains that they were originally set in
some other position, and have since slumped to their current configuration.
West of this sloping wall was a platform, about 60 cm wide, composed of more
large, flat boulders set in plaster (Stratum 103a). This platform was placed on top of the

dry fill exposed in unit 4. Above the narrow platform rose a nearly vertical wall face,
about 1.5 m high (Stratum I 02). Excavators of this wall recovered several flint cores, as
well as other types of stone, including polished river stones and possibly basalt.
Apparently these were used as part of the masonry fill. Wall 102 formed a retaining wall
for the rest of Structure 2B behind it, which was topped with an eroded platform (Stratum
I 07). This platform continued westward to the juncture with Structure 2A.
Our attempt to expose the architecture of Structure 2C was less successful. The
1.5-m vertical wall that topped the playing wall was fully exposed, along with the narrow
platform at its base. These two features were given the same stratum numbers (I 02 and
I 03 respectively) as those on Structure 2B. The existence of the features at the correct

38

height satisfactorily demonstrated that the structures do represent a ballcourt. However,
exposure of the sloping wall of Structure 2B was not completed by the end of the season.
Therefore the sloping playing wall of 2C is reconstructed by analogy to the much more
fully excavated 2B.
Between the two structures was exposed the much eroded plaster floor of the final
playing alley (Stratum 112). While this floor was not reported in 2002 when the original
trench was excavated, its cobble ballast can be seen in the north profile of the ballcourt
alley unit completed in 2004 (Figure 16). Just east of the first line of stones forming the
ballcourt masonry, several large stones rise out of the plaster floor. We named this area
stratum 111, but there was some disagreement as to its significance. Around this pile of
stones, plaster had melted away, making it difficult to determine where the masonry
ballcourt began and the plaster floor ended. It is likely that the plaster floor in this area
was reinforced by large ballast stones that originally ran underneath it, and that these
stones were subsequently disturbed by root activity (Figure 20).
All of the features just discussed yielded Late Classic (AD. 600-800) ceramics.
(Table 1) While it was originally hypothesized that the foundation layers of Structure 2B
might have been built during an earlier phase of construction, the ceramics recovered
showed that this was probably not the case. Therefore the entirety of the architecture
exposed in 2005 represents the terminal construction of the ballcourt, and the architecture
of its Late Preclassic predecessor still lies buried underneath or was demolished during
the its Late Preclassic termination.

Summary. While no investigation was undertaken to locate the corners of the
ballcourt structures, survey indicates that they are each about 17 m in length. Excavation

39

indicated that the ballcourt a1ley, at least during its terminal phase, was 5 m wide. From
the a11ey floor to the summits, the ba1lcourt structures would have stood at 3 m in height
in their final phase. Excavations in 2005 clarified that the ba1lcourt structures are aligned
at 18 degrees east of north, or 108 degrees. The ba1lcourt was origina11y built in the Late
Preclassic period, and was modified later on during this time period. Between 250 B.C.
and A.D. 250 it was ritua1ly terminated and went unused for several hundred years,
before it was rebuilt in the Classic Period.
The ba1lcourt's Preclassic phase was not ful]y exposed, but must have consisted
of a bench face 20 cm high, and a nearly horizontal bench top of undetermined width (but
at least .8 m wide). In the Late Classic, the ba1lcourt's profile had a 20 cm vertical surface
or bench face, a 30 degree sloping surface rising to a height of 2 m, a 60 cm horizontal
surface, and a final vertical wa11 rising to the height of I m.

Analysis
The data co1lected from the ballcourt at Y albac were compared to the data
co1lected from both regions. Once again, I-tests were performed to test the hypothesis that
Yalbac differed significantly from ballcourts in each region. Like in previous analyses, a
set at .05. The results are shown below.

Alley Length
Belize River Valley
t=.16; d.f=I8,p>.05

Three Rivers Region
t=.29; d.f=I8; p>.05

Excluding North Caracol Farm
t=.04; d.f=l 7; p>.05

Y albac was not significantly different from the sample of either region.

Alley Width
Belize River Valley

Three Rivers Region

t=.24; d.f=I8;p>.05

t=.50; d.f=18; p>.05

40

Yalbac was not significantly different from the sample of either region.
Structure Height
Belize River Valley
Three Rivers Region
t=.65; df=-9;p>.05
t=.10; df=-S;p>.05
Yalbac was not significantly different from the sample of either region.
Orientation (all ballcourts)
Belize River Valley
Three Rivers Region
t=.96; df=18; p>.05
t=.55; df=l8; p>.05
Yalbac was not significantly different from the sample of either region.
Orientation (north-south ballcourts only)
Belize River Valley
Three Rivers Region
t=2.75; df=-17;p<.05
t=l.48; df=-IS;p>.05
Yalbac was significantly different from the Belize River Valley, but was consistent with
the Three Rivers Region.

As the data for these attributes indicate, the ballcourt at Yalbac would be
unremarkable in either population were it not for its orientation. At 108 degrees, the
Yalbac ballcourt is consistent with ballcourts from the Three Rivers Region, but is
significantly different from those in the Belize River Valley.
The ballcourt' s profile is also puts it squarely within the Three Rivers sample. In
its terminal phase, the ballcourt's 30 degree slope is completely uncharacteristic of the
Belize Valley, but is similar to ballcourts at San Jose and Chan Chich in the Three Rivers
Region. Like San Jose, the Yalbac ballcourt also has a vertical wall .6 m in height at the
top of this slope. The percentage of the height of the structures accounted for by this wall
was 20 percent, far more consistent with ballcourts from the Three Rivers Region.
However, one cannot ignore the ballcourt's Preclassic architecture. The fact that
architecture from this date even exists links the ballcourt to the Belize Valley, since no
ballcourt construction is known in the Three Rivers Region from this time. Furthermore,
while the Preclassic ballcourt at Yalbac was not fully excavated, the area that was

41

exposed revealed a slightly sloping bench top at least .8 m wide. This feature is consistent
with ballcourts from the Belize River Valley. Therefore, while the Y albac ballcourt was
undoubtedly tied to the Three Rivers Region during its later use, the strong possibility
exists that it was originally part of the Preclassic ballcourt tradition of the Belize River
Valley. Yalbac's ballplaying affiliations therefore probably changed through time,
shifting from south to north during the Late Classic period.

Conclusion
The data presented reveal that it is possible to evaluate Yalbac's broader
geographical affiliations by analyzing and comparing the form and chronology of
ballcourts in its two neighboring regions. The study also demonstrates that the
typological classification ofballcourt architecture must be conducted on a local level, and
incorporate those features which are important in that area, rather than those which form
important distinctions elsewhere, such as end zone demarcation or the presence of
ballcourt markers.
While we can only speculate as to the original function of each ballcourt feature,
an assumption that can be made is that these features influenced how the ballgame was
played at each site, and that regional standardization existed where there was a high
degree of ballgame interaction between communities. Ballplayers of one community
would have been unlikely to play at the ballcourt of another community if it was
substantially different from their own and gave the home team the advantage.
Standardization would have countered this advantage and made it possible for individuals
to play at numerous ballcourts of other communities. Excavation at the Yalbac ballcourt
suggests that during the Late Preclassic period Y albac competed with sites in the Belize

42

River Valley, but that by the Late Classic period this interaction shifted to the Three
Rivers Region. Thus, by defining those areas of standardization, large and small, one can
gauge the amount of ballgame competition between sites, and, by extension, the amount
of social and political interaction as well.

Sport, Community, and Politicization
As the data presented here have shown, Yalbac participated in ballgame
competitions with other communities in northern Belize. During the Late Preclassic, it is
likely that this competition was primarily with communities of the Belize River Valley,
but by the Late Classic period, it had shifted to communities in the Three Rivers Region.
Although no monumental inscriptions have ever been recovered from Yalbac (or indeed,
most of the sites in this study), evidence from other sites also suggests that the Maya
ballgame was important to the elite ruling class, who attempted to establish symbolic
links between themselves and the act ofballplaying. The association of political power
with athletic activities is common in many societies, as is the process by which sport
becomes politicized. Through the examination of this process, a model for the perception
of sport among the Maya can be developed.
Hill and Clark (2001), as we have already seen, suggest that a natural association
exists between the ruling elite ofMesoamerica and the ballgame. They propose that this
association is fundamental to the ballgame itself. Individuals who control access to the
ballcourt, as well as the financial benefits of gambling activities, are able to acquire (or in
this case maintain) greater wealth and status than their peers. Their status is also

43

reinforced symbolically through their role as sponsor of the village team, and the creator
of community identity through competition with other villages.
While this model is insightful, it casts the elite class as the primary force behind
the continuation of the ballgame tradition, relegating the lower classes, presumably many
of whom were ballgame aficionados themselves, to the role of passive receivers. An
examination of athletic activities in other contexts, however, will show that it is generally
the amorphous group of observers~the very community reinforced by athletics
themselves~that control the popularity and create the power of sports. That sport and
community are closely linked is an obvious reality. But a further exploration of the nature
of this symbolic association will clarify the role of the ballgame for the Maya, and
specifically for the people ofYalbac.

Sport and Warfare
In order to compare the Maya ballgame to athletic events from other societies, it
is necessary to define sport itself. Blanchard and Cheska (1985) define sport as, "a gamelike activity having rules, a competitive element, and requiring some form of physical
exertion" (p. 14). Sands (1999) offers a more refined definition:
A cultural universal having the following features: a human activity that is
a formal and rule-directed contest ranging from a gamelike activity to a
highly institutionalized structure; competition between individuals or
teams or can result in internal competition within an individual; a basis in
physical skills, and strategy, chance or a combination of all three; and
potential tangible rewards for the participants, monetary, material or status
[p. 3].
Both these definitions emphasize the competitive nature of sport, and could even be
applied to other human activities generally categorized as warfare. Indeed, it has often

44

been observed that athletic events are similar to warfare in numerous ways. Sports are
fundamentally a form of conflict and display certain features thereof. For instance, two
opposing teams or participants struggle for a limited resource-only one side can win and
by so doing, achieves a hierarchical status over the other (faster, stronger, smarter, etc.)
(Blanchard and Cheska 1985 :217). Furthermore, as in warfare, athletes are uncertain of
the outcome of competition (Blanchard and Cheska 1985 :218).
Many aspects of warfare are also similar to what one might think of as sport-like
behavior. In some societies, warfare is a highly ritualized performance, sometimes devoid
of any real violence. Specific agreed-upon rules dictate who will be the clear winner, and
battles are often plam1ed and announced ahead of time (Blanchard and Cheska 1985:219).
Even in modern warfare, rules of conduct are often observed, and combatants themselves
are surrounded by sport-like symbols-rites, flags, and uniforms that differentiate them
from their enemies (Kertzer 1988).
Even though sport is sometimes thought of as "war without weapons," (Blanchard
and Cheska 1985: 218) it is also often associated with peace and a cessation of warfare.
The modern Olympic Games embody this ideal. through peaceful, organized sport,
nations of the world are supposed to set aside their differences and reach a common
understanding. This, in turn, was designed to be a reflection of the ancient Olympics, at
which an Olympic Truce was declared, designed to protect athletes and spectators from
becoming involved in local conflicts. Cities that engaged in hostile military action during
this time were fined heavily or were not allowed to compete (Romano 1985).
Thus, although the two activities are similar, sport and warfare are often mutually
exclusive. It must be possible, therefore, to find a factor that differentiates the two

45

activities, and to further refine the definition of sport. While the physical acts of warfare
and sport are sometimes indistinguishable, the difference between them lies in the way
they are perceived by members of their representative communities. The factor that
separates sport from warfare is perhaps best articulated by Geertz (1973) in his classic
study of the Balinese cockfight. Like sporting events, cockfights pit two fighting animals
against one another, cheered on by crowds of supporters. Although the roosters fight to
the death, their owners and the spectators are rarely harmed. Here, each match is plainly a
metaphor for social hierarchies and distinctions, and spectators are polarized by their
support of social allies.
The cockfight is - or more exactly, deliberately is made to be - a
simulation of the social matrix, the involved system of crosscutting,
overlapping, highly corporate groups --villages, kingroups, irrigation
societies, temple congregations, "castes" - in which its devotees live [p.
436].
However, when the match is over, and metaphors for social conflict have been played
out, nothing has fundamentally changed.
Fighting cocks ... is like playing with fire only not getting burned. You
activate village and kingroup rivalries and hostilities, but in "play" form,
coming dangerously and entrancingly close to the expression of open and
direct interpersonal and intergroup aggression ... , but not quite, because,
after all, it is "only a cockfight" [p. 440].
The cockfight. .. makes nothing happen. Men go on allegorically
humiliating one another and being allegorically humiliated by one another,
day after day, glorying quietly in the experience if they have triumphed,
crushed only slightly more openly by it if they have not. But no one's
status really chm1ges. You cmmot ascend the status ladder by ,vinning
cockfights; you cannot as 811 individual, really ascend it at all. Nor can
you descend it that way [p. 443].
This, then, is what differentiates sports and "play" from warfare: the eventual outcome.
No matter how ritualized the warfare, it is always carried out in an attempt to change
something, whether that be power relationships, the distribution of resources, or prestige.
46

Athletics are simply a metaphor for this type of conflict since in the end, nothing has
changed. Even when victorious athletes, representing their communities, regions, or
nations, achieve exalted status among the people they represent, the fundamental status of
those people, communities, and nations relative to their competitors is never changed.
Under these circumstances, war and sport cannot coexist. Once sport becomes a
vehicle for change, it is no longer sport at all, but open hostility. The closer sport comes
to crossing this line, the more exciting and emotionally charged a sporting event will be.
For instance, the United States led an international campaign to boycott the 1980
Moscow Olympics due to the Soviet Union's invasion of Afghanistan. Casting the
invasion as a "morally indecent act" unbefitting of a host nation, President Carter asked
the nations of the world to skip the Olympiad that year (Hulme 1990:45). While the
Carter administration clearly felt that relations between the nations were too strained for
athletic competition, the Soviet Union nevertheless sent athletes to the Winter Games,
held in Lake Placid, New York. The subsequent contest between the men's hockey teams
was a politically and emotionally charged event, symbolic of the very governmental
systems of the two nations. The resulting victory of the underdog U.S. team caused a
national euphoria that "far superseded any reaction based purely on sporting
considerations" (Hulme 1990:10).
When tensions do reach a breaking point, however, nations often refuse to
compete in sporting events against other nations with whom they are engaged in political
conflict. For instance, during the years of apartheid in South Africa, the international
sporting community began to boycott South African sports teams. In the 1970' s, the
United Nations called on the world to cease athletic competition against South Africa.

47

The New Zealand rughy team, which ignored this request, faced the ire not only of the
international community, but of New Zealanders themselves, who rioted during the tours
of 1981 and 1985 (Crawford 1999).
The mutual exclusivity of sport and warfare, and the inability of sport to change
status relationships may superficially seem to contradict the themes of warfare and
sacrifice often present in the Mesoamerican ballgame. Spanish sources indicate that
among the Aztec, high-stakes games could result in the control of cities or kingdoms. A
ballgame is documented between emperor Axayacatl and his rival Xihuitlemoc, in which
each put up huge stakes of whole cities (Stem 1950:62). Santley et al. (1991), citing other
stories of famous ballgames in Mexican lore, propose that the ballgame was a "vehicle to
increase the power, prestige, and wealth of the elite" (p. 14). While the loss of cities
would certainly impact the wealth of the respective rulers, the point of the exercise was
surely the boastful wagering and display of confidence in the outcome of the game itself,
rather than the material gains or losses. (Besides, when Xihuitlemoc easily won the game,
Axayacatl had him promptly assassinated to avoid paying [Stem 1950:62].) Legendary
ballgames, such as that to determine the ruler of the Toltec Empire (Santley et al.
1991: 15) cannot be firmly relied upon as a model for historical ballgame competition, as
they are surely just that: legend.
Even the Popol Vuh, in which, as it is often claimed, the outcome of key
ballgames determines the sacrifice of the Maize god and his sons, is not so cut and dried.
While the ballgame certainly acts as a frame in which a myth about conflict can be
recounted (Tokovinine 2002:6), the ballgames played may not necessarily determine the
fate of the gods. One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu, although sacrificed at the ballcourt,

48

never explicitly play against the gods of the underworld, and they are presumably
sacrificed on account of a plethora of failures they endure before even reaching the
ballcourt. One Hunahpu's twin sons, on the other hand, play twice in the underworld. At
first they are defeated, and forced to pay the price of four bowls of flowers, a wager
agreed upon before the start of the game. In the second game, the twins win, but they are
sacrificed anyway through the deceit of the lords of the underworld. Ifwe examine
strictly the outcome of the ballgames played between the gods in the underworld, wins
and losses do not seem to directly influence the sacrifices in the story.
For the reasons outlined above, it seems unlikely that Maya polities would have
participated in ballgame competitions against their political enemies. While the game
may have been played as part of a celebration of military victory, it is unreasonable to
assume that an athletic event served as a venue for hostile competition, or even that
prisoners of war would have engaged in such an event with their captors. Images of
ballgame sacrifice that are historical, rather than metaphorical or mythological, involve a
captive as a ball, rather than as any kind of worthy opponent.

Sport and Community Identity
Cross-culturally, people spend a great deal of time, energy, and emotion on
sporting events. But, as we have seen, athletic competition thrives even when real
hostility is absent. If sports cmmot change social hierarchies or settle disputes, what is the
purpose of participating in these activities at all? Because, as Hill and Clark (2001) have
observed, sport creates a sense of community-Communitas. The deliberate creation of
conflict where none really existed creates a unity within a group through the opposition to
the Other. Through conflict, community identity is reaffirmed. Thus, sporting events will

49

become more popular and emotionally charged not only in the face of increased military
tensions, but in the face of a loss of community identity as well.
There are numerous factors which might cause a community to feel that its
identity is threatened. For instance, a general proximity or cultural similarity may bring
about the desire for the reaffirmation of community differences. It is an easily observable
phenomenon in modern American athletics that cross-town rivalries are often the
strongest, as communities which may seem overwhelmingly similar to outside observers
compete viciously every year to prove their superiority. The need for the reaffirmation of
regional identity surely contributes to the intense soccer rivalries within European nations
and among them (Bale 1997). In Italy for instance, soccer fanaticism is mostly expressed
locally in the form of violent support of municipal teams. When the World Cup was held
in Milan in 1990, Italian fans, rather than uniting around their national team, were
divided by local rivalries. Southern Italians supported the Argentinean team due to the
presence of Naples captain Maradona on the roster, while Northern Italians booed
Argentina to the echo for the same reason. Support for the national team was not lacking
from other World Cup years, but the arrival of the competition in Italy itself ignited local
rivalries (Dal Lago and De Biasi 1994).
The United States is not immune to such rivalries. When Canadian track star
Donovan Bailey won the 100-meter final at the 1996 Olympics, the American media
refused to accept his claim of world's fastest man in favor of200- and 400-meter
champion Michael Johnson. With wounded pride and feeling challenged in its national
identity, Canada suggested a compromise: the two athletes would run a 150-meter race to
determine the superior of the two athletes. The rhetoric surrounding the race created a

50

metaphorical duel between Canada and the United States (Jackson and Meier 1999).
Unfortunately, Johnson was injured during the race and crossed the finish line with a
limp, behind his opponent.
The dense settlement along the banks of the Belize River and within the Three
Rivers Region would have been a likely locus for an athletic rivalry created by general
proximity and cultural similarity. The fact that most of the communities in these regions
had a local ballcourt, and that there was a high degree of standardization among them,
strongly supports this assertion. As I have already argued, standardization is only likely
to exist in areas where inter-village games are a regular occurrence.
A second form of threat a community may feel towards its local identity is
perceived social inferiority or political subordination5 . While wrapped up in the
complicated and painful issues of colonialism, cricket in the Caribbean offers an
illustration of sport as reassertion of cultural pride and desire for political independence.
Already a symbol of class and racial differences, Stoddard (1995) asserts that, "it was
inevitable that the politicization of West Indian cricket should spill over into the realms
of nationalism, ideology, party politics, and international relations" (p. 242). From the
very introduction of cricket in the British West Indies, the goal of defeating England
itself, as a demonstration of cultural worth, was felt by many. When this finally took
place in 1950, the victory was celebrated with jubilation throughout the British Caribbean
(Stoddard 1995).
Such athletic defiance would be difficult to detect archaeologically, at least
among the Maya. However, these sentiments may very well have been felt by
communities subordinate to major polities. Perhaps this is even what we see in the

51

famous "Site Q" ballplayer panels. It is known that La Corona was subordinate to the
powerful kingdom of Calakmul, and that the panels record ballgames that took place
there. While the panels superficially celebrate the friendly relations between the two
cities, and the peaceful games played between them, it is surely possible that such games
were perceived by the La Corona populace as a dignified assertion of equality with the
powerful city, if not politically, at least on the ballcourt.
A final way in which a community's local identity maybe threatened is far more
problematic for elites or political leaders. If the class structure within society is such that
members of one socioeconomic stratum identify more closely with their peers than with
other members of their community, the stage has been set for rebellion and social
upheaval. These circumstances are likely to occur where a common elite culture spans
multiple communities or regions. If the interactions, material resources, and aesthetics
shared by members of this elite set them apart substantially from non-elite citizens, these
lower classes may begin to wonder about the benefits of a shared community identity and
fail to support the elite materially.
To counteract this very problem in Medieval Italy, members of the elite classes in
Siena employed a traditional competition between the city's wards. Every year, these

contrade compete in a series of events, culminating with the Palio, a horserace through
the center of the city. The festival was the highlight of the year for the city's population,
and was enthusiastically followed by rich and poor alike (and still is). Since the contrada
is a socially heterogeneous unit, the Palio encourages local identity at the expense of
class-based identity. The ruling Medici family, aware of this phenomenon, encouraged

52

the Palio as a "strong counterfource against class-based horizontal alliances" (Silverman
1981:179).
While phenomena such as the Palio may also be impossible to detect
archaeologically, this may be a fruitful way of looking at the Maya ballgame. A very
uniform elite culture certainly existed among the Maya that cross-cut community
divisions. Political alliances were formed between far-flung cities, and it is certainly
possible that there was a degree of danger to allowing class divisions outweigh
community loyalties. Rulers and elites certainly spent a great deal of effort in celebrating
victories over rival polities, referencing local gods, and establishing royal legitimacy
through local precedent and founder cults. Perhaps the ballgame was another source of
local legitimacy, as rulers built ballcourts to reinforce local ties and community identity.
This may be the case at Tonina, where the ballcourt even explicitly references that city's
hostility with Palenque and domination over its neighbors.
Athletic competitions serve a vital purpose of uniting a community in the absence
of any real outside conflict. In essence, they create conflict where there is none. Such
conflict is necessary in order to create a sense of community and reinforce local identity.
Therefore, sport is necessary when this identity is threatened in some way. This threat
could be in the form of a general proximity or similarity to other communities, political
dominance, or class divisions. There are good indications that all three of these general
circumstances were at work among the Maya, and contributed to the popularity of the
ballgame.
Under these circumstances, sports are often the only means a community has of
asserting its identity, and they are easily politicized. In order to achieve or maintain

53

political power, rulers will readily seek to associate themselves with the unifying force in
the community. This principle can be observed in modern contexts. In Brazil, soccer, it
can be argued, "more than any other single factor helped to unite the huge, sprawling
country" (Snyder 1976: 272). Under these circumstances, soccer was easily seized as a
symbol for the military regime in the 1970's. The government co-opted soccer songs and
slogans to reinforce its image as a representative of all the people, and enflame Brazilian
nationalism (Snyder 1976). A similar phenomenon can be observed in Italian politics,
where the party Forza Italia ("go Italy") takes its name from a popular soccer chant.
Members of the party refer to themselves a Azzurri (blues) in a clear reference to the
national team (Wikipedia contributors 2006).
It has already been observed that the Maya ballgame was a politicized event, with
Maya rulers claiming ballplayer titles and generally associating themselves with the
game. Rather than growing out of any natural association between the elite and the game,
the process by which this took place was probably similar to the many examples I have
described here. As communities faced threats to their local identities, the ballgame
became a vital means of reasserting that identity, and was thus seized upon by rulers in an
attempt to reference gronp solidarity. The Communitas created by the ballgame gave rise
to its association with political rulership.

If the model I have just outlined is truly applicable to the Mesoamerican
ballgame, then ballcourt was more than a ceremonial location, used for rigid ritual
activity. The competitions that took place at the ballcourt were dynamic, exciting, and
emotional for participants and spectators alike. This model is supported by archaeological
and historical evidence: ballcourts were arenas for inter-community competition, and the

54

ballgame was a highly politicized event. Ballgames were popular with aU members of
society, and have been present since the very beginning of settled village life (Hill and
Clark 2001). By comparing the Maya baUgame to athletic events as they are manifested
world-wide, a better understanding of its function and significance can be achieved.

Conclusion: Sport, Community, and the Ballgame at Yalbac
No monumental inscriptions record the dedication of Yalbac 's baUcourt, nor do
carved images depict games played there. But the ballcourt itself, and its similarity to the
ba11courts of its neighbors, indicate that it was used as a venue for competition with other
communities. During the Late Preclassic period, Yalbac, along with several connnunities
in the Belize River Valley possessed ballcourts that were similar to one another,
facilitating inter-village competition. During the Early Classic Period, several ballcourts
throughout the valley were temporarily neglected or permanently abandoned. The first
ba1lcourts of the Three Rivers Region were constructed during this time period, but the
ballcourt at Yalbac was rituaUy terminated and went unused for several centuries. Finally,
in the Late Classic period, ballcourts began to spring up throughout both regions.
Yalbac's ballcourt was rebuilt, its new architecture fitting its new connections: the
ballgame at Y albac was now played against its northern neighbors of the Three Rivers
Region.
Why did the ballgame lose popularity during the Early Classic Period? Why did
Yalbac's competitiveness shift from south to north? Perhaps the answers to these
questions lie in the nature of these communities themselves, and what the ballgame meant
to them. Athletic events reinforce community cohesion through the invention of conflict

55

with other communities where none actually exists. This is most necessary when some
force acts to threaten community cohesion or identity. This could include such factors as
political dominance by another community, identity based on class solidarity, or simply
rising populations and encroaching communities.
During the Late Preclassic, populations throughout the Maya lowlands rose and
communities multiplied, developing hierarchies of size and power. But at the end of the
Preclassic (ca. A.D. 100-300) many sites in the Maya lowlands suffered population loss
and abandonment. Populations rose once again throughout the Classic period, reaching
their height during the Late Classic (Sharer 2006). It is simplistic to argue that population
numbers directly affected the popularity of the ballgame, but a general correlation
between the number ofballcourts in northern Belize, as well as the pattern of their
maintenance, and the rise and decline of populous states of the Maya lowlands, is easily
observable. As communities increased in size and number, it is only natural to assume
that traditional local identities were challenged and new ones formed. The ballgame, as a
medium of expressing group solidarity, could certainly be expected to increase in
popularity during these times.
Any number of factors could have caused the northward shift in Yalbac' s
ballgame efforts. Perhaps the distribution of settlement in the area connected Y albac
more closely with these communities than with those in the Belize Valley. Perhaps
trading networks north of the Belize River drew Yalbac's attention. Perhaps political
domination from the north or cultural similarities brought about the need for community
cohesion through outside competition. The question warrants further investigation, and
future excavations at Yalbac and other sites may offer a test of the implications of this

56

study. What is clear, however, that Yalbac's community identity, as reinforced by the
ballgame and evident at the ballcourt at which it was played, was defined in relation to,
and through opposition to its neighbors, the many sites of northern Belize.

Notes
1. See Miller and Houston (1987) for a complete discussion of the ballcourt/stairway

conflation.
2. While cardinal orientation is normally measured with zero representing true north, 90
representing east, etc., most ballcourts under examination are generally aligned
north/south. I will therefore report orientations in degrees from west in a clockwise
direction. Therefore, one degree west and one degree east of north are reported as 89
degrees and 91 degrees respectively, rather than 359 degrees and 1 degree, as in the
traditional system.
3. The coefficient of variation is a measure of dispersion that takes the size of the mean
into account. Whereas two standard deviations cannot be directly compared, two
coefficients of variation can be, since they indicate the percentage of variation contained
in each sample. Although there is no standardized way of evaluating the strength of the
coefficient of variation, those much larger than 10 percent indicate that the data are
highly variable or do not fall in a normal distribution (Thomas 1986:84). The small
sample sizes here may exaggerate this problem.
4. Indeed, the American Sports Builders Association (2003) lays out specific guidelines
for the orientation of Tennis Courts according to the times of year and times of day at
which they are most likely to be used.

57

Table
Table 1. Ceramics Collected from the Yalbac Ballcourt
Unit

Stratum

Description

Ceramic dates

2004

Ballcourt
Alley

102 Topsoil/cobbles

Ballcourt
Alley

103

Ballcourt
Alley
Ballcourt
Alley
Ballcourt
Alley

104 Floor/ballast

Late Preclassic through Terminal
Classic; Sierra Red (Barton Creek),
Minanha Red (Hermitage), Mt.
Maloney (late facet Spanish
Lookout), Roaring Creek Red (late
facet Spanish Lookout), Tutucan?
Striated (Spanish Lookout)
Late Classic; ash tempering; Belize
Red (Spanish Lookout), and perhaps
Mt. Pine Red (Tiger Run)
Tiger Run or later

105

~Tiger Run

Ballcourt
Alley

Collapse

Floor

108 Clay fill

108
lower

Cultural clay fill
with burning

Ballcourt
Alley

109 Cobbles/
deteriorating
plaster

Ballcourt
Alley

110 Cultural clay fill

Ballcourt
Alley

111

Ballcourt
Alley

112 Plaster floor

Ballcourt
Alley

113

Possible plaster
floor (remnant/
ballast)

Plaster floor

Middle Preclassic-Late Preclassic;
Jocote Orange-brown (early facet
Jenny Creek); jar w/ filleting (likely
late facet Jenny Creek); Polvero
Black (Barton Creek); Trijinto ?
Cream
~Paso Caballo; what also seems
Preclassic is thickness of plate/bowl
forms
Savanna Orange; Jenny Creek; 900600/300 B.C.; calcite/ash
Sierra Red- BC, 300-100 B.C.;
~Quacco Creek-Mount Hope, 100
B.C.-A.D. 100
Sapote Striated, BC, 300-100 B.C.

Ashy body sherd ~w/ medial flange;
~Floral Park
Ashy orange w/ thick grayish core;
open fonn (bowl or plate)

59

Ballcourt
Alley

114 Dark cultural clay
fill

Ashy orange; ~very shallow plate w/
remnant red slip

Unit 1

101

Unit 1

109 2A fa,;:ade

Late Classic large turnip jar rim;
Early Classic z-angle; Preclassic
bulge bowl
Late Classic; annular ring base,
shallow plate, volcanic ash paste

Unit 2

101

Unit 2

107 2B fa,;:ade

Unit 2

109 2A fa,;:ade

Unit 3

101

Topsoil

Unit 4

101

Topsoil

Unit 4

106 Dry core fill

Unit 5

101

Topsoil

Unit 6

101

Topsoil

Unit 7

101

Topsoil

Unit 7

104 Backfill

-

Unit 8

101

Late Classic foot; Early Classic/Late
Classic flange; Early Classic flange;
orange volcanic ash paste narrow
orifice jar w/ red slip on both sidesstraight-sided

2005

Topsoil

Topsoil

Topsoil

Late Classic bowl slipped on both
sides; Late Classic volcanic ash
armular base; Early Classic z-angle;
~Preclassic bulge bowl
Late Classic; jar rims-flared
Late Classic; incurving bowl w/
slight ridge on outside; volcanic ash
paste
Late Classic volcanic ash flared
bowls (2) slipped both sides,
volcanic ash annular base, evertedjar
rim; Preclassic bulge bowl
Late Classic volcanic ash straightsided bowl, slipped both sides,
everted jar rim
2 Late Classic volcanic ash body
sherds
Late Classic volcanic ash incurving
bowl with interior slip (~exterior),
volcanic ash flared bowl, 2 large
everted jar rims, narrow orifice
evertedjar rim (or a Preclassic bowl)
Late Classic volcanic ash red slipped
(interior) bowl, volcanic ash body
sherd
Late Classic volcanic ash foot, bowl
(volcanic ash, limestone temper),
armular base, volcanic ash plate;
Early Classic flange

60

Figures

Mexico
@

@LaMilpa

kakablsh

 Rl<>Ali'.UI

MaaxNa
@ Dos hornbrt.s
Chawakeut\rob   Quam HIii

Booth's

Belize

River

Hills..

Yalbac
El Pililr

Belize River Valley

N

A
61

Figure 1 (Previous page). Map of the Belize River Valley and Three Rivers Region.
Based on International Travel Maps 2001. (Do not use for navigational purposes!)

t
N

Plaza 3

m, Loot-ors trtm.ch


Possible steta

50

100

m
Figure 2. Y albac Site Core. Mapped by the Valley of Peace Archaeology Project

62

Figure 3. Yaxchilan Hieroglyphic Stairway 2 Step
VII. Drawn by John Montgomery.

-<

63

t=-~---:~"'..'":T . )\
~""4>1

I

Figure 4. La Amelia Stela 2. Drawn by Stephen Houston

64

Figure 5. Ballgame scenes on
polychrome ceramic vessels.
"Referee" figure elevated in center.

5a. Photograph by Justin Kerr.

(K2731)

65

5b. Photograph by Justin Kerr. (K5435)

66

5c. Photograph by Justin
Kerr. (K.3814)

67

Figure 6. "Site Q" Ballplayer Panel from La Corona. Drawing by John Montgomery.

68

Figure 7. Cancuen Ballcourt Marker I. Photograph by Harri Kettunen.

69

Figure 7. Cancuen Ballcourt Marker I. Photograph by Harri Kettunen.

69

Figure 8. Polychrome ceramic
vessel. Photograph by Justin Kerr.
(K2803)
8a. Ballgame scene

70

8b. Owner of the vessel: Hix Witz ajaw bate'
"Jaguar Hill lord wrestler"

8c. Caption of ballplayer: ubaah ta pitz chak ch 'ok kelem Sak

Muwaan k'uhul IkAjaw
"It is his image in ballplaying, great prince, youth, Resplendent
Hawk, holy lord of Ik [Motul de San Jose]."

71

Figure 9. Titles of Shield Jaguar II ofYaxchilan

9a. Yaxchilan Stela 12. Drawing by Linda Schele

ho winikhaab yajawte' ho winikhaab pitzil
"5 'k'atun' [80+ year-old] lord of the tree, 5 'k'atun'
ballplayer"

9b. Dos Caobas Stela 1. Drawing by Hal Green

"5 k' atun lord, 5 k' atun wrestler, 5 k' atun ballplayer, 5
k'atun 'chahoom"'

9c. Y axchilan
Hieroglyphic Stairway 3.
Drawing by Ian Graham

ho winikhaab bate' ho
winikhaab pitzil ho
winikhaab yajawte' ho
winikhaab ch 'ahoom
"5 k'atun wrestler, 5 k'atun ballplayer, 5 k'atun lord of the tree, 5 k'atun 'ch'hoom"'

72

Figure I 0. Titles of Bajlaj Chan K'awiil of Dos Pilas

I Oa. Dos Pilas Hieroglyphic Stairway 4.
Drawing Stephen Houston.

bate 'pitz
"wrestler ballplayer"

I Ob. Dos Pilas Hieroglyphic
Stairway 2. Luis Fernando
:

Luin.

bate' pitz bajlaj chan k'awiil

(

l. ..

k'uhul mut ajaw

;

... . . .

e,

 ~

i .

..

f ::--

wrestler ballplayer, K'awiil

.......

 i

Hammers in the Sky, holy
lord of Dos Pilas.

73

Figure 11. Ballplayer titles at Palenque

11 a. Palace Tablet. Drawing by Merle Green
Robertson.

chan winikhaab ajaw k'inich janaab pacal pitziil
k 'uhul matwiil ajaw le 'uhul baak ajaw
"4 k' atun lord, Radiant ? Shield, ballplayer, holy
lord ofMatwiil, holy lord of Palenque"

11 b. Palace Tablet. Drawing by Merle Green
Robertson.

k'inich k'anjoy chitaam u k'al k'aba 'pitziil ohl k'uhul
matwiil ajaw, k'uhul baak ajaw
"Radiant Precious Tied Peccary is the royal name of the
ballplayer-hearted holy lord of Matwiil, holy lord of
Palenque."

74

1 lc. Tablet of 96 Glyphs. Drawing by
Merle Green Robertson.

baakel way aj pitziil oh! yajawte' k'inich
k'uk' balam hun winikhaab ajaw bakab

..

"bony-way [companion spirit], he of the
ballplayer heart, lord of the tree, Radiant

. ~::_:"~~

f11r>-~~~(

:,\.
.

:

Quetzal Jaguar, k' atun [less than 20
year-old] lord, 'bakab"'

1 ld. Childhood name of Kan Balam II. Temple
XVIII Stucco Fragments. From Schele and
Mathews 1979.

aj pitziil oh! ch 'ok
"He of the Ballplayer Heart, prince"

11 e. Palace Tablet. Drawing by Merle Green
Robertson.

chumwaan suk winik ch 'ok aj pitziil oh/ k'inich kan
balam uk'al k'aba 'k'uhul baak ajaw winikhaab pitz
"He seated [acceded], the older brother prince, He of
the Ballplayer Heart. Radiant Snake Jaguar is the
royal name of the holy lord of Palenque, the k'atun
ballplayer."

75

Figure 12. Titles ofK'inich Baaknal
Chaak ofTonina.

12a. Monument 134. Drawing from
Graham and Mathews 1999.
k'inich baaknal chaak yajawte 'pitziil
k'uhul popo' ajaw
"Radiant Bone-place Chaak [rain god],
lord of the tree, ballplayer, holy lord of

Tonina"

12b. Ballcourt inscription.
Monument 141. Drawing from
Graham and Mathews 1999.
ox ahal [ballcourt} u[ballcourt]
yajawte 'pitziil k 'inich baaknal
chaak k'uhul popo' ajaw
"3 victory ballcourt, it is the
ballcourt of the lord of the tree, ballplayer, Radiant Bone-place Chaak, holy lord of

Tonina."

76

Figure 13. Panels from the Tonina ballcourt. Drawings from Graham and Mathews 1996.

13a. Monument 65.
yajaw aj pitz baak ajaw

"He is the vassal of the ballplayer, the Palenque
lord."

13b. Monument 31. (Though eroded, the



: -....


 . . . . . . . . ...

phrase is legible and identical to Monument
65.)
yajaw aj pitz baak ajaw

"He is the vassal of the ballplayer, the
Palenque lord."

77

Figure 14. A polychrome ceramic vessel, probably from Naranjo. Photograph by Justin
Kerr. (K.8622)

14a. Mythological scene.

14b. Rim text identifying owner of the vessel.
yuk 'ib ti yutal kakaw itz 'aat pitz
"It is the drinking cup for fruity chocolate of the 'itz'aat' ballplayer."

78

("Fruity" translation from Stuart 2004:6).

Figure 15. Incised alabaster vessel. Photograph by Justin Kerr. (K7749)

15a. A strange, bloody wrestling scene.

15b. Rim text identifying owner of the vessel.
yuk'ib lumil pitziil uwi' winikil bate' pitziil u-?-il kabal pitziil
"It is the drinking cup of the dirty ballplayer, the last man of the wrestler ballplayer, the

son of the earthy ballplayer."

79

Figure 16. Ballcourt Alley Profiles.
Drawn in 2004.

z
-~
,.,.
0

::r

! 11

r

""O

'

0:,

(")

0)

OJ

~
1',"

;::;-

"':,ro

C

0

....
......

9-

&'
-

0OJ

("\

)>
(1)

'<

.-

0

0

'

0
0

0
0

o'
0

0

'

'
'0 ''

o
0

'oil

''

o' o
0 '

80

2B
7

N

Figure 17. Excavation units frorn 2005.

81

]
3

VI
,..,.

.....
C

n
,...
C
.....

ro
N

a:,

Figure 18. North Profile ofYalbac Ballcourt. Final construction phase.

82

Figure 19. Intact facing stones in unit 6.

83

Figure 20. Stratum 111. Disturbed alley floor in unit 8.

84

Appendix A: Ballcourts of the Belize River Valley
Actuncan. Only one ballcourt has been identified at Actuncan, excavated in 1993
and 1994 by the Xunantunich Archaeological Project. The playing alley measures
roughly 16-x-3.75 m (McGovern 1994:Figure 5) but the height of the parallel structures
was not reported. The ballcourt, like the majority in both regions, is aligned generally
I

north-south, with an orientation of80 degrees (10 degrees west of true north) (McGovern
1993:Figure 2). The ballcourt's chronological sequence, determined from six flooring
episodes excavated in the ballcourt alley, began in the Late Preclassic Period (300 B.C.A.D. 1). This was followed by floors dated to the Protoclassic (A.D. 1-250), and Late
Classic (A.D. 600-850) periods (McGovern 1993). Excavations of the western ballcourt
structure revealed that the alley was originally wider than its terminal phase, and was
constricted through time by various construction phases (McGovern 1994). McGovern
(1994:Figure 5) indicates that the ballcourt has a sloping bench face and a bench top
nearly three meters wide. Ferguson (1999) also indicates that the playing wall of the
ballcourt was probably vertical, while the bench was gradually modified through time
from a horizontal surface to a sloping one.

Baking Pot. Three ballcourts have been identified at Baking Pot, and are treated in
detail by Ferguson (1999). The Structure II-D Ballcourt Complex was excavated by
William Bullard and Mary Ricketson Bullard of the Royal Ontario Museum in 1961
(Ferguson 1999). The ballcourt alley measures 19-x-3.15 m, but the structures are of
unequal heights (3.4 m and 2.6 m). Since ballcourt structures generally form mirror
images of one another, the shorter height is a more appropriate measure, with the extra
height of the other structure possibly being due to a later addition unrelated to ballgame

85

play. The only east-west ballcourt in the Belize River Valley, the II-D Ballcourt Complex
is oriented at 166 degrees (14 degrees north of true east-west). Based on ceramic analysis,
the ballcourt was given a Late Classic period date. Only two flooring episodes were
identified in the ballcourt alley, although the earlier of these may have been built prior to
the ballcourt's original construction (Ferguson 1999). Excavations in the northern
ballcourt structure revealed that the ballcourt has a 1 m high bench face and 3 m wide
bench top (Ferguson 1999). Above the bench top rises a sloping playing wall at about 65
degrees (Bullard and Bullard 1965:Figure 7 in Ferguson 1999).
Baking Pot's Plaza 2 Ballcourt was excavated by the Belize Valley
Archaeological Reconnaissance Project in 1995 and 1996. Survey revealed that the
ballcourt alley measures 19-x-4.5 m (Ferguson 1999), though the height of the structures
was not reported. The Plaza 2 Ballcourt is oriented at 82 degrees, or 8 degrees west of
north. The chronology of the ballcourt is not entirely clear. While ceramic evidence dates
other features in the area to the Early Classic period, the ballcourt was added to
previously existing buildings at an unknown date (Ferguson 1999). Furthermore,
Ferguson argues that there are three distinct construction phases of the ballcourt itself,
and that the terminal phase dates to the Late or Terminal Classic period. Although
Aimers (in Ferguson 1999) claimed that the ballcourt's profile resembles that of the II-D
Ballcourt, Ferguson (1999) believes otherwise. While the first phase of the ballcourt had
a "vertical bench face, slightly sloping bench top, and vertical playing wall" (Ferguson
1999: 87) subsequent phases increased the slope of the bench top and decreased the slope
of the playing wall from vertical to sloping. Despite this lack of agreement, it seems clear
that the Plaza 2 ballcourt was nevertheless similar to the II-D ballcourt in the presence of

86

these three features, which, although characterized by gradual changes in slope angle,
probably were of similar sizes.
The North Ballcourt at Baking Pot was excavated in 1997 by the Belize Valley
Archaeological Reconnaissance Project. The ballcourt alley measures 20-x-5.5 m, and the
heights of the structures are 1.64 m and 1.57 m (Ferguson 1999). The ballcourt alley is
oriented at 98 degrees (Ferguson 1999:Figure 3.10). Excavations revealed five
replasterings of the bench surface, and six plaza floors. Few ceramics were recovered, but
they indicated that the ballcourt was built in a single phase of construction during the
Late Classic period (Ferguson 1999). The North Ballcourt also resembles the II-D
ballcourt in "size type and architectural construction" (Ferguson 1999:99) and has a
sloped bench face, slightly sloping bench top, and steeper playing wall.
Blackman Eddy. Only one ballcourt has been identified at the site of Blackman

Eddy, which was excavated in 1991 by the Belize Valley Archaeology Project (Ferguson
1999). The playing alley measures roughly 17-x-6 m (Hartman 1995), though structure
heights were not reported. The ballcourt is oriented at 85 degrees. No chronological data
is available for the ballcourt. Excavations were limited to the playing alley and revealed
three soil strata, but no plaster floors (Garber et al. 2004). No information is available
about the ballcourt's playing walls.
Buenavista de! Cayo. Two ballcourts have been identified at Buenavista de! Cayo,

and were excavated by the Mopan-Macal Triangle Archaeological Project of San Diego
State University in the 1980s (Ball and Taschek 2001). The South Ballcourt at the site has
an alley measuring approximately 24-x-6 m (Ball and Taschek 1991 :Figure 2). Although
the height of the structures has not been published, the orientation of the ballcourt alley

87

runs at 66 degrees (Ball and Taschek 1991 :Figure 2). The South Ballcourt was
constructed in the Late Preclassic period, during the first century B.C. (Ball and Taschek
2001). The ballcourt was replastered several times during the Late Preclassic and Early
Classic periods. The ballcourt was terminated between AD. 640 and 660, and its central
cache was removed for later deposition in the new North Ballcourt. The ballcourt's
profile consists of a vertical playing wall and sloping bench top (Ferguson 1999). A wide
bench top (approximately 4.5 m) is illustrated by Ball and Taschek (2001 :Figure 6.8).
The North Ballcourt at Buenavista del Cayo has a playing alley measuring
approximately 21-x-3 m and lies at an orientation of 76 degrees (Ball and Taschek
1991 :Figure 2). Constructed shortly after the termination of the South Ballcourt, the
North Ballcourt was built between A.D. 700 and 750, and contained the cache removed
from the South Ballcourt (Ball and Taschek 2001). Like its counterpart, the North
Ballcourt has vertical playing walls and sloping bench tops (Ferguson 1999), but a more
narrow bench top (approximately 3 m) is illustrated by Ball and Taschek (2001 Figure
6.8).

Cahal Pech. Two ballcourts have been identified at Cahal Pech. The Eastern
Ballcourt was excavated in 1995 by the Belize Valley Preclassic Maya Project of Trent
University (Ferguson et al. 1996). The playing alley measures about 16-x-4 rn, and the
ballcourt structures were 4.5 min height (Ferguson 1999). Although Ferguson et al.
(1996:36) report the orientation of the Easter Ballcourt as "11 degrees east of magnetic
north," the map of the site core indicates that the ballcourt structures, along with many
other structures at the site, are in fact oriented at about 14 degress west of north, or 76
degrees (Ferguson et al. 1996:Figure I). Ceramics from the Eastern Ballcourt indicated

88

that it was built in a single phase of construction during the Late Classic period (A.D.
700-900) (Ferguson et al. 1996). The ballcourt's profile is composed of sloping bench
faces which rise to a height of approximately .75 cm (Ferguson et al. 1996:Figure 2),
nearly horizontal bench tops about 2.6 m wide, and playing walls that extend to the top of
each structure at an 80 degree angle (Ferguson 1999).
The Western Ballcourt at Cahal Pech is smaller than its counterpart, with an alley
measuring 15-x-3 m, and the structures measuring 2 min height (Ferguson 1999). The
orientation of the ballcourt is just about true north/south, or 90 degrees (Ferguson et al.
1996:Figure 1). The Western Ballcourt, like the eastern, was built in a single construction
phase between A.D. 800 and 850 during the Late Classic period. It's profile contains a
roughly vertical bench face, horizontal bench top, and vertical playing wall (Ferguson
1999). Ball and Taschek (2001:Figure 6.8) indicates that the bench tops are little over a
meter wide.
El Pilar. Excavated by the Belize River Archaeology Settlement Survey Project,
El Pilar contains two ballcourts. The Eastern Ballcourt was excavated in 1995 (Ford et al.
1995). A map of the site (Wernecke 1993:Figure 3) indicates that the playing alley
measures about 15-x-5.5 m, and was oriented at 95 degrees. Four plaster floors were
uncovered in the ballcourt alley, and evidence suggests that the ballcourt was initiated in
the Late Preclassic period (Ford et al. 1995). The ballcourt's playing wall is vertical, and
no subsequent changes to its architecture were identified (Ferguson 1999).
El Pilar' s western ballcourt remains unexcavated, though it has been observed that
the ballcourt alley measures approximately I 0-x-8 m and that the ballcourt is oriented at
approximately 90 degrees (Ferguson 1999).

89

Las Ruinas de Arena!. One ballcourt has been identified at Las Ruinas de Arena!,
although it has not been excavated. The site was investigated in 1991 and 1992 by Joseph
Ball and Jennifer Taschek of San Diego State University (Taschek and Ball 1999). The
ballcourt alley measures approximately 13-x-5 m (Taschek and Ball 1999:Figure 2),
although the height of the structures was unreported. The ballcourt is oriented at
approximately 93 degress (Taschek and Ball 1999:Figure 2). Although the ballcourt has
not been excavated, ceramic evidence from looters trenches indicates that it was initiated
between A.D. 420 and 540 during the Early Classic period (Ferguson 1999).

North Caracol Farm. North Caracol farm was investigated in 1995 by the Belize
Valley Archaeological Reconnaissance Project and one ballcourt was identified
(Ferguson 1999). Its alley measures only 5-x-2 m but the structures are 2 min height. The
ballcourt's orientation was reported at approximately north-south, or 90 degrees
(Ferguson 1999). While no excavation has taken place, surface collection yielded
ceramics from the Late and Terminal Classic periods, and investigators hypothesize that
the ballcourt was built in a single construction phase (Ferguson 1999).

Ontario Village. One ballcourt has been identified at Ontario Village, and was
excavated in 1993 and 1994 by the Belize Valley Archaeology Project. The ballcourt's
alley measures 15-x-5 m, and its structures rise to a height of2 m and 2.8 m (Garber et al.
1994). The orientation of the ballcourt is 92 degrees (Driver and McWilliams
1995:Figure 44). Ceramics collected during excavations indicate that the ballcourt was
constructed in a single phase during the Late Classic Period. Excavations indicate that the
ballcourt has a bench top that slopes at 17 degrees, and vertical playing wall about half a
meter in height. On Structure A3, the higher of the two, another terrace rose above the

90

top of this playing wall (Garber et al. 1994:Figure 11, Driver aud Mc Williams
1995:Figure 3.7).

Pacbitun. The ballcourt at Pacbitun was excavated between 1984 and 1987 by
Paul Healy. The ballcourt's playing alley measures 17.5-x-4.8 m, while the structures
measure 3.5 min height (Healy 1992). The structures are oriented at approximately 76
degrees (Healy 1992:Figure 2). Four major architectural phases of the ballcourt were
recognized. The first phase, dating to the Late Preclassic period (300-100 B.C.), consisted
of a bench face angled at 40 degrees, which rose to a height of 54 cm, a horizontal bench
top 2.2 m wide, and a playing wall which sloped at 45 degrees to the structrure's summit,
2.8 m above the alley floor (Healy 1992). A series ofreplasterings dating to the Early
Classic period (A.D. 300-550) make up the second phase, and the ballcourt did not
undergo major modification until phase 3, dating to the Late Classic period (A.D 550700). At this time, vertical wall one meter in height was added at the juncture between the
ballcourt's bench top and its sloping playing wa!I. Although this short wall did not reach
the summit of the structures, it effectively gave the ballcourt a vertical, rather than
sloping, playing wall. The final phase, dating to the Terminal Classic period (A.D 700900), added a 40 cm high platform on top of the ballcourt structures, bringing them to
their present height.

Saturday Creek. The ballcourt at Saturday Creek was excavated in 2001 by the
Valley of Peace Archaeology Project. The ballcourt alley measures approximately 26-x-5
meters (Jeakle 2002:Figure 3), and the structures measure 3.04 m and 2.4 min height
(J eakle 2002). The ballcourt is oriented at 80 degrees (J eakle 2002). Excavations in the
ball court alley exposed six plaster flooring episodes. The first of these dated to the Late

91

Preclassic period (300-100 B.C.) as did the third and fourth (A.D. 1-250) (Jeakle 2002).
The fifth and sixth floors dated to the Terminal Classic period (A.D. 700-900) (Jeakle
2002). While these floors suggest a long occupation in this area, (with a noticeable lack
in construction during the Early Classic) the ballcourt's eastern structure was only
excavated to the depth of its Late Classic component (A.D. 600-700). The profile of this
structure is curious in that, while it has a vertical bench face approximately half a meter
high, and a slightly sloping bench top (about 11 degrees), no playing wall is apparent,
vertical or otherwise (Jeakle 2002:Figure 5). This makes the Saturday Creek ballcourt
somewhat unique among the ballcourts examined from the Belize Valley.

X-ual-canil. The X-ual-canil ballcourt was excavated in 1996 and 1997 by the
Social Archaeology Research Program of Trent University. While the dimensions of the
ballcourt alley were not precisely determined, it measures approximately 14-x-5 m
(Ferguson 1996:Figure 4). The heights of the structures are .99 and 1.05 m, which for
simplicity's sake will be rounded to 1 m (Ferguson 1996). The structures are oriented at
73 degrees (Ferguson 1996:Figure 4). Excavations revealed that the ballcourt was built in
a single phase of construction during the Late Classic period (Ferguson 1996).

Xunantunich. Two ballcourts have been identified at Xunantunich. The
westernmost of these, Ballcourt I, was initially excavated in 1978 (Ferguson 1999). The
ballcourt alley measures 10-x-4 m, and the structures are oriented at 78 degrees (Jamison
and Wolff 1994:Figure I). The chronology and profile of the ballcourt is undetermined
(Ferguson 1999).
Ballcourt 2 was excavated in 1994 by the Xunantunich Archaeological Project.
The ballcourt alley measures 15-x-5.5 m, and the structures stand at a height of

92

approximately 2.1 and 1.13 m (Jamison and Wolff 1994). Like Ballcourt 1, Ballcourt 2
was oriented at 78 degrees. Two floors were identified in the ballcourt alley. Although
ceramics recovered from this excavation were primarily from the Middle Preclassic
period, sherds from the Early and Late Classic were identified at all stratigraphic levels,
indicating that the ballcourt was originally built during Late Classic times (Jamison and
Wolff 1994). The ballcourt's profile consists of a sloping bench face .95 m high, a bench
top roughly three m wide, and a playing wall over a meter in height (Jamison and Wolff
1994).

93

Appendix B: Ballconrts of the Three Rivers Region
(Unless otherwise stated, the sites are located in northern Belize.)
Blue Creek. The ballcourt at Blue Creek was investigated by the Maya Research
Program under the direction of Thomas Guderjan during the 1990's (Guderjan 2004).
The ballcourt alley measures approximately 19-x-6 m and is oriented at 85.5 degrees
(Guderjan 2004:Figure 4). A test pitting program at the ballcourt and its associated
platform revealed that it was built during the Early Classic period, though the profile of
its walls was not determined (Guderjan 2004).
Chan Chich. The ballcourt at Chan Chich was excavated in 1997 by the Chan
Chich Archaeological Project. The ballcourt alley measures 28-x-l Om and the structures
stand at a height of 4.3 m (Ford 1998). The structures are aligned at 84 degrees (Ford
1998:Figure). There were two major construction phases at the Chan Chich ballcourt. The
first construction phase, described as "tiered" was fairly complex (Ford 1998). It
consisted of a basal tier, similar to the benches of the Belize River Valley, that was 70 cm
in height and 2.1 m wide. Above this, a second tier rose to a height of 44 cm, and its
sloped surface was also 2.1 m wide. The slope of this surface was about 13 degrees.
Finally, another vertical step rose above this sloping surface an additional 45 cm, to the
top of the structure. A paucity of ceramics made it difficult to date this earlier
construction phase (Ford 1998). In its second phase, the ballcourt was simplified. The
original 70 cm step above the alley floor was reduced to 30 cm, and above this a 26
degree sloping surface rose an additional 3 m above the alley floor. Above this surface a
final 30 cm high wall reached the summit of the structure. Based on ceramic evidence,
this phase of construction was dated to the Late Classic period (Ford 1998).

94

Chawak But 'o 'ob. A ballcourt was recently identified at Chawak But'o'b by the

Rio Bravo Archaeological Survey project (Stanley Walling, Personal Communication
2005). The only available data for this ballcourt are its alley dimensions: 16-x-8 meters
(Walling n.d.).
Chochkitam. The site of Chochkitam is located in northeastern Guatemala.

Although its ballcourt has never been excavated, the site was mapped by Blom (in
Morley 1937). This map indicates that the ballcourt's alley measures approximately 16-x4 meters, and the structures are oriented at approximately 90 degrees (Morley 193 7:Plate
193b).
Dos Hombres. Two ballcourts have been identified at Dos Hombres. Ballcourt 1

was excavated in 1994 by Brett Houk of the Programme for Belize Archaeological
Project (Houk 1996). The ballcourt alley measures 18-x-4 m (Houk 1996), while the
structures stand at a height of3 m (Houk 1996:Figure 5.23). The structures are oriented at
approximately 90 degrees (Houk 1996). The ballcourt was built in a single phase of
construction, which dates to A.D. 700-800 in the Late Classic period, as indicated by
ceramics from the alley floor (Houk 1996). The profile of the ballcourt's playing walls
consists of a 20 cm vertical rise above the alley floor, topped by a 17 degree sloping
surface five m wide. Above this sloping wall rises a .85 m vertical wall, topped by a
second sloping surface, this one two m wide with an incline of 7 degrees. Above this
inclined surface is a final .3 m vertical face, which brings the ballcourt to its summit
platforn1 (Houk 1996:Figure 5.23).
The second ballcourt at Dos Hombres was excavated in 1996 by Steven R.
McDougal of the Programme for Belize Archaeological Project. The ballcourt alley

95

Chawak But 'o 'ob. A ballcourt was recently identified at Chawak But'o'b by the

Rio Bravo Archaeological Survey project (Stanley Walling, Personal Communication
2005). The only available data for this ballcourt are its alley dimensions: 16-x-8 meters
(Walling n.d.).
Chochkitam. The site of Chochkitam is located in northeastern Guatemala.

Although its ballcourt has never been excavated, the site was mapped by Blom (in
Morley 1937). This map indicates that the ballcourt's alley measures approximately 16-x4 meters, and the structures are oriented at approximately 90 degrees (Morley 1937:Plate
193b).
Dos Hombres. Two ballcourts have been identified at Dos Hombres. Ballcourt 1

was excavated in 1994 by Brett Houk of the Programme for Belize Archaeological
Project (Houk 1996). The ballcourt alley measures 18-x-4 m (Houk 1996), while the
structures stand at a height of3 m (Houk 1996:Figure 5.23). The structures are oriented at
approximately 90 degrees (Houk 1996). The ballcourt was built in a single phase of
construction, which dates to A.D. 700-800 in the Late Classic period, as indicated by
ceramics from the alley floor (Houk 1996). The profile of the ballcourt's playing walls
consists of a 20 cm vertical rise above the alley floor, topped by a 17 degree sloping
surface five m wide. Above this sloping wall rises a .85 m vertical wall, topped by a
second sloping surface, this one two m wide with an incline of 7 degrees. Above this
inclined surface is a final .3 m vertical face, which brings the ballcourt to its summit
platform (Houk 1996:Figure 5.23).
The second ballcomi at Dos Hombres was excavated in 1996 by Steven R.
McDougal of the Programme for Belize Archaeological Project. The ballcourt alley

95

measures 11-x-3 m (McDougal 1997) and the structures are approximately 2 min height
(McDougal 1997 fig. 3.3). Like Dos Hombres Ballcourt 1, the ballcourt is oriented at
approximately 90 degrees. While some ceramics recovered during excavations date to the
Early Classic period, the majority indicated that the ballcourt was constructed and
occupied during the Late and Terminal Classic periods (A.D. 550-900) (McDougal
1997). McDougal (1997:Figure 3.3) indicates that the profile of the ballcourt structures
consists of a sloping surface rising above the playing alley at about 45 degrees to a height
of approximately .7 m. Above this wall is a horizontal terrace approximately 2.5 m wide.
Beyond this is a vertical wall several courses high.

E'Kenha. The site ofE'Kenha was mapped in 1988 by the Rio Bravo
Archaeological Project (Guderjan et al. 1991). The map includes structures which may
represent a ballcourt, although one structure is longer and higher than the other. The alley
between the structures measures 16.5-x-8.7 meters, (as determined by the smaller
structure) and the structures are oriented at 100 degrees (Guderjan et al. 1991 :Figure 33).
A looter's trench in the larger structure indicates that there were two major construction
episodes, but they have not been dated (Guderjan et al. 1991).

Gran Cacao. The Gran Cacao ballcourt was excavated in 2004 by the Blue Creek
Regional Political Ecology Project. The ballcourt alley measures 3.5-x-16.5 m, (Lohse et
al. 2004) while the structures rise to a height of approximately 3.5 m (Lohse et al.
2004:Figure 4). The structures are oriented at 107 degrees (Lohse et al. 2004:Figure !).
The ballcourt was built in a single phase of construction during the Late Classic period.
Above the alley, the ballcourt' s profile consists of a sloping bench face like those found
in the Belize River Valley approximately .4 m high, a 3 m wide bench top that slopes at

96

approximately 11 degrees, a 1.5 m high wall that slopes at an angle of 61 degrees, a
horizontal surface 1.5 m wide, and a second meter high wall that slopes at 66 degrees
(Lohse et al. 2004:Figure 4).

Ixno' Ha. The ballcourt at Ixno' Ha was excavated in 2002 by the Blue Creek
Regional Political Ecology Project. The ballcourt structures measure 1.4 min height, and
are oriented east-west, at 16 degrees. Ceramics indicated that the ballcourt was
constructed during the Early Classic period, and the profile of the structures consists of a
sloping plastered surface, and several walled terraces (Lalonde 2002).

Kakabish. One ballcourt has been identified at Kakabish, which was surveyed by
the Maya Research Program in 1996. The ballcourt alley measures approximately 12.5-x7 m, and the structures are oriented at 86 degrees (Guderjan 1996:Figure 35). Since the
ballcourt has not been excavated, no data are available pertaining to the ball court's
profile or chronology.

Kina!. Kina! is located in northeastern Guatemala and was mapped in the early
1960's by Ian Graham (Graham 1967). The site was excavated in 1991 by the Ixcanrio
Regional Project (Houk 1996), but I was unable fo obtain the results of these excavations.
Graham's map (1967:Figure 21) indicates that the ballcourt's playing alley measures
approximately 20-x-7 m, and that the structures are oriented at 115 degrees.

La Honradez. La Honradez is also located in northeastern Guatemala, and was
mapped in 1967 by Eric Von Euw (Von Euw and Graham 1984:Figure 21). Interestingly,
La Honradez contains a double ballcourt complex, in which two ballcourts were
constructed next to each other, a single central structure forming the west playing wall for

97

one, and the east playing wall for the other. Both alleys measure 20-x-4 m, and the
structures are all oriented at I 00 degrees.

La Milpa. Two ballcourts have been identified at La Milpa. They were excavated
in 1992 by the La Milpa Archaeological Project (Schultz et al. 1994). The North
Ballcourt's alley measures 26-x-7 m, and its structures are 2.5 m high. The structures are
oriented east-west at I 0.5 degrees. Ceramic data indicate that the ballcourt was
constructed after A.D. 750 in the Terminal Classic period. The profile of the ballcourt
consists of a 37 degree sloping surface .7 min height, a 17 degree surface 4.75 m wide,
and a vertical wall at least .75 m high. Overall, this profile resembles those found in the
Belize River Valley (Schultz et al. 1994).
The alley of the South Ballcourt at La Milpa measures 19-x-5 m, and the
structures are 5.5 min height. The ballcourt is oriented at 95 degrees. Like its northern
counterpart, the South Ballcourt also dates to the Terminal Classic period. The South
Ballcourt's profile consists of a 38 degree sloping surface 1.4 min height, a horizontal
surface 2 m wide, and a 32 degree sloping surface rising an additional 3 m (Schultz et al.
1994:Figure 7).

Maax Na. The ballcourt at Maax Na was excavated in 1996 and 2003 by the Maax
Na Archaeology Project. The ballcourt's alley measures 17.5-x-5 meters (Leslie Shaw,
sketch map in possession of the author) and the structures are approximately 2 min
height (Shaw and King 2003:Figure 4). The ballcourt is oriented at 94 degrees (Shaw and
King 2003:Figure 3). Two major construction phases have been identified, both of which
date to the Late Classic period and were built over earlier residential structures (Leslie
Shaw, personal communication 2005). The first phase of construction consisted of a short

98

vertical rise about 13 cm high, a horizontal surface approximately .4 m wide, a 20 degree
sloping surface 2 m wide (and about .7 5 m in height) and a final horizontal surface at
least .45 m wide (Shaw and King 2003:Figure 4). The second construction phase
consisted ofa 47 degree sloping surface rising .5 m above the alley floor, a 10 degree
sloping surface approximately 2.9 m wide, and a 45 degree sloping wall rising an
additional 1.5 m (Shaw and King 2003:Figure 4).

Punta de Cacao. The ballcourt at Punta de Cacao was mapped in 1990 by the
Maya Research Program (Guderjan et al. 1991) and excavated in 2001 by the Punta de
Cacao Archaeological Project (Robichaux et al. 2001). The ballcourt alley measures
approximately 19-x-11 m and the structures are oriented at 163 degrees (Guderjan et al.
1991 :Figure 35). The ballcourt was built in a single construction phase during the Late
Classic period (Robichaux et al. 2001).

Quam Hill. Quam Hill was also mapped in 1990 by the Maya Research Program
(Guderjan et al. 1991). The ballcourt alley measures approximately 16-x-10 m, and the
structures are oriented at 87 degrees (Gude1jan et al 1991:Figure 50). No information is
available about the chronology or profile of the ballcourt structures.

Rio Azul. The site.,ofRio Azul is located in northeastern Guatemala. Although
extensive excavation and mapping have taken place there under the Rio Azul
Archaeological Project (Houk 1996), its single b2:llcourt has not been excavated to my
knowledge. The ballcourt alley measures 17-x-6.5 m and the structures are oriented at

I 02 degrees. No information is available pertaining to the ballcourt's chronology or
profile.

99

San Jose. San Jose was excavated in the 1930's by J. Eric Thompson. A single
ballcourt was documented at the site, whose alley measures 17-x-5 m, and whose
structures measure 4 m in height and are oriented at 93 degrees. Ceramic analysis
indicates that the ballcourt was constructed during the Late Classic period. The
ballcourt's profile consists ofa 26 degree sloping wall which is approximately 4 m wide,
and a vertical wall 1.6 min height (Thompson 1939). Thompson (1939) hypothesizes that
at the base of the sloping surfaces there may be low terraces or benches, but admits that
they may not exist, as any indication thereof would reduced the alley width to a very
narrow 1.8 m. Since these terraces were not definitively located, I conclude that they are,
in fact, nonexistent, and that the alley is indeed 5 m wide.

100

Acknowledgements
Since I have spent a good chunk of my college years working on this thesis, it
only seems appropriate that I should take some space to thank those who have been
behind me along the way, both academically and otherwise.
My research at Yalbac was made possible through the generosity and support of
Dr. Lisa Lucero of New Mexico State University, who allowed me to dig at the ballcourt
for two summers, and who gave me the freedom to make my own mistakes and the
respect to listen to what I had to say. I am also grateful to Andrew Kinkella for making
life in the field so enjoyable and for all his insights into the ways of Maya archaeology.
Excavations at the ballcourt would simply not have been possible without the expertise of
Mr. Scott of Valley of Peace Village, who was always able to keep me on my toes.
Thanks to the rest of the VOPA crew: Ernesto, Don Luna and Cleofo of Valley of Peace
Village, Ivy, Chad, Sandra, and Adam in 2004, and Nancy, Rachel, Debbie, Michelle,
Monica, Doris, and Kyle in 2005. Finally, the University of Pennsylvania College
Alunmi Society made my return to Belize in 2005 possible with its generous funding.
In the research of this thesis, I was assisted by several people who sent me data
and publications that I could not find elsewhere. These include Dr. Hubert Robichaux,
Dr. Brett Houk, Dr. Eleanor King, Dr. Leslie Shaw, Dr. Jon Lohse, Dr. Jim Garber, Dr.
Gyles Iannone, and Dr. Stanley Walling. I am very grateful for their generosity and
general enthusiasm for my project.
Here at Penn I have been lucky to interact with many great scholars, several of
whom have been pivotal to my studies of the Maya. Simon Martin, with whom I have had
the privilege of studying for the past two years, has been a great source of
encouragement and motivation, constantly pushing me beyond what seemed possible. Dr.
Robert Sharer, my advisor for this project, has also been an invaluable source of advice,
and has steered me in the right direction on many an occasion. The many scholars of the
Mesoamerican coffee hour have greatly enriched my undergraduate experience, and I am
grateful for their advice and encouragement.
Throughout my college years my parents, Karen and Dana Baron, have given me
constant financial and emotional support, although they may not have always have
understood the strange places my academic interests took me. A wonderful group of
friends and classmates have helped see me through my years at Penn. Thanks especially
to the players and coaches of the Penn women's hockey team, who have kept me aware
of the fact that some things are more important than academics.

101

References Cited
Acosta, Jorge R. and Hugo Moedano Koer
1946 Los Juegos de Pelota. In Mexico Prehispanico: Culturas, Deidades y

Monumentos. Antologia de Esta Semana This Week, edited by Emma Hurtado, pp.
365-384. Mexico, D.F.

American Sports Builders Association
2003 Tennis Court Construction Guidelines. Electronic document,
http ://sportsbuilders.org/page. php ?id= l 3&from%5B%5D= 11 &from%5B %5D= 12
&, accessed March 21, 2006.

Bale, John
1997 Identity, Identification and Image: Football and Place in the New Europe. In

Football and Regional Identity in Europe, edited by Siegfried Gehrmann, pp. 279294. Transaction Publishers, Rutgers State University, New Brunswick, New
Jersey.

Ball, Joseph W. and Jennifer T. Taschek
1991 Late Classic Lowland Maya Political Organization and Central-Place
Analysis: New insights from the Upper Belize Valley. Ancient Mesoamerica, Vol.
2, pp. 149-165.

102

2001 The Buenavista-Cahal Pech Royal Court: Multi-palace Court Mobility and
Usage in a Petty Lowland Maya Kingdom. In Royal Courts of the Ancient

Maya, Volume 2: Case Studies, edited by Takeshi Inomata and Stephen D.
Houston, pp. 165-200. Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado.

Baron, Joanne. P.
2005 The Ballcourt at Yalbac: 2004 Season. In Results of the 2004 Valley of Peace

Archaeology Project: The Temples and Bal/court of Yalbac, edited by Lisa. J.
Lucero, pp. 28-42. Report submitted to the Institute of Archaeology, Belmopan,
Belize.

2006a Chalk Talk at Yalbac: 2005 Season at the Ballcourt. In Results of the 2005

Valley ofPeace Archaeology Project, edited by Lisa J. Lucero. Report submitted
to the Institute of Archaeology, Belmopan, Belize.

2006b The Origins and Placement of the Ballcourt at Yalbac. In Research Reports in

Belizean Archaoelogy. Institute of Archaeology, National Institute of Culture and
History, Belmopan, Belize.

Blanchard, Kendall and Alyce Cheska
1985 The Anthropology of Sport: an Introduction. Bergin and Garvey,
Massachusetts.

103

Blom, Frans F.
1932 The Maya Ball-game Pok-ta-pok (Called Tlachtli by the Aztec). Middle
American Reseach Series, Tulane University of Louisiana, publication number 4,
Maurice Ries, general editor, pp. 185-530. New Orleans.

Bradley, Douglas E.
2001 Gender, Power, and Fertility in the Olmec Ritual Ballgame. In The Sport of

Life and Death, edited by Michael Whittington, pp. 32-39. Thames and Hudson,
New York.

Bullard, William R. Jr. and Mary Ricketson Bullard
1965 Late Classic Finds at Baking Pot, British Honduras. Art and Archaeology

Occasional Paper No. 8, Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto.

Chase, Arlen F and James F. Garber
2004 The Archaeology of the Belize Valley in Historical Perspective. In The

Ancient Maya of the Belize Valley: Half a Century of Archaeological Research
pp. 1-14. University Press of Florida, Gainesville.

Christenson, Allen J. , translator
2003 Papal Vuh: The Sacred Book of the Maya. 0 Books, New York.

Cohodas, Marvin

104

1991 Ballgame Imagery of the Maya Lowlands: History and Iconography. In The

Mesoamerican Ballgame, edited by Vernon L. Scarborough and David R. Wilcox,
pp. 251-288. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Cougnaud, Agnes, Hal Green, Bea Koch, and Al Meador
2003 The Dos Caobas Stelae. Wayeb Notes No. 3. Electronic document,
http://www.wayeb.org/notes/wayeb_ notes0003 .pdf, accessed March 23, 2006.

Crawford, Scott
1999 Nelson Mandela, the Number 6 Jersey, and the 1995 Rugby World Cup:
Sport as a Transcendent Unifying Force, or a Transparent Illustration of Bi cultural
Opportunism. In Anthropology, Sport, and Culture, edited by Robert R. Sands,
pp. 119-135. Bergin and Garvey, Westport, Connecticut.

Dal Lago,Alessandro and Rocco De Biasi
1994 Italian Football Fans. In Football, Violence and Social Identity, edited by
Richard Giulianotti, Norman Bonney and Mike Hepworth, pp. 73-89. Routledge,
New York.

Driver, W. David and Jennifer K. Mc Williams
1995 Excavations at the Ontario Village Site. In The Belize Valley Archaeology

Project: Results of the 1994 Field Season, edited by James F. Garber and
David M. Glassman, pp. 26-57. University Press of Florida, Gainesville.

105

Ferguson, Josalyn M.
1996 The Ballcourt at X-ual-canil, Belize: 1996 Investigations. In The Social

Archaeology Research Program: Progress Report of the Second (1996) Season,
edited by Gyles Iannone, pp. 39-55. Department of Anthropology, Trent
University, Peterborough, Canada.

1999 The Ballgame at Baking Pot, Belize: An Analysis of the Ballcourts at a
Maya Civic Centre. Masters Thesis, Trent University, Peterborough,
Ontario, Canada.

Ferguson, Josalyn, Tina Christensen and Sonja Schwake
1996 The Eastern Ballcourt, Cahal Pech, Belize: 1995 Excavations. In Belize

Valley Preclassic Maya Project: Report on the 1995 Field Season, edited
by Paul F. Healy and Jaime J. Awe, pp. 34-59. Trent University
Department of Anthropology Occasional Papers in Anthropology No. 12.
Peterborough, Ontario, Canada.

Ford, Anabel, D. Clark Wernecke and Melissa Grzybowski
1995 Archaeology at El Pilar: A Report on the 1995 Season. Electronic document,
http://www.marc.ucsb.edu/elpilar/fieldreports/l 995report/l 99 5_report.html,
accessed March 23, 2006. BRASS/El Pilar Program.

106

Ford, Owen
1998 Excavations at the Ballcourt. In The 1997 Season of the Chan Chich

Archaeological Project, edited by Brett A. Houk, pp. 53-58 .. Papers of the Chan
Chich Archaeological Project No 3. Center for Maya Studies, San
Antonio, Texas.

Fox, John Gerard
1996 Playing with Power: Ballcourts and Political Ritual in Southern
Mesoamerica. Current Anthropology, Vol. 37, No. 3, pp. 483-509.

Fox, John W.
1991 The Lords of the Light Versus the Lords of the Dark: the Postclassic
Highland Maya Ballgame. In The Mesoamerican Ballgame, edited by Vernon L.
Scarborough and David R. Wilcox, pp. 213-240. University of Arizona Press,
Tucson.

Freidel, David, Linda Schele and Joy Parker
1993 Maya Cosmos: Three Thousand Years on the Shaman's Path. William
Morrow and Company, Inc., New York.

Garber, James F., David M. Glassman, W. David Driver, and Pamela Weiss

107

1994 The Belize Valley Archaeology Project: Results of the 1993 Field Season.
Submitted to the Department of Archaeology, Belmopan, Belize.

Garber, James F., M. Kathryn Brown, W. David Driver, David M. Glassman, Christopher
J. Hartman, F. Kent Reilly III and Lauren A. Sullivan
2004 Archaeological Investigations at Blackman Eddy. In The Ancient Maya of

the Belize Valley: Half a Century ofArchaeological Research, edited by
James F. Garber, pp. 48-69. University Press of Florida, Gainesville.

Gates, William, translator
1978 Yucatan Before and After the Conquest by Fiar Diego de Landa. Dover, New
York.

Geertz, Clifford
1973 The Interpretation of Cultures. Basic Books, New York.

Gillespie, Susan D.
1991 Ballgames and Boundaries. In The Mesoamerican Ballgame, edited by
Vernon L. Scarborough and David R. Wilcox, pp. 317-345. University of Arizona
Press, Tucson.

Graham, Ian

108

1967 Archaeological Explorations in El Peten, Guatemala. Middle American
Research Institute, Tulane University, publication number 33. New
Orleans.

1997 The Mission to La Corona. Archaeology, Vol. 50 No. 5. Electronic document,
http://www.archaeology.org/9709/etc/la.corona.html, accessed March 23, 2006.

Graham, Ian and Peter Mathews
1996 Corpus of Maya Hieroglyphic Inscriptions, Vol. 6 Part 2. Peabody Museum
of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

1999 Corpus of Maya Hieroglyphic Inscriptions, Vol. 6 Part 3. Peabody Museum
of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Guderjan, Thomas H.
1996 Kakabish: Mapping of a Maya Center. In Archaeological Research at Blue

Creek, Belize: Progress Report of the Fourth (1995) Field Season, edited
by Thomas H. Guderjan, W. David Driver, and Helen R. Haines, pp 117-199.
Maya Research Program, San Antonio, Texas.

Guderjan, Thomas H.
2004 Public Architecture, Ritual, and Temporal Dynamics at the Maya Center
of Blue Creek, Belize. Ancient Mesoamerica, Vol. 15, pp. 235-250.

109

Guderjan, Thomas H., Michael Lindeman, Ellen Ruble, Froyla Salam, Jason and Yaeger
1991 Archaeological Sites in the Rio Bravo Area. In Maya Settlement in

Northwestern Belize, edited by Thomas H. Guderjan. Maya Research
Program and Labyrinthos.

Hartman, Christopher J.
1995 Excavations on Structure A7 at Blackman Eddy. In The Belize Valley

Archaeology Project: Results of the 1994 Field Season, edited by James F. Garber
and David M. Glassman, pp. 21-25. Submitted to the Department of Archaeology,
Belmopan, Belize.

Healy, Paul F.
1992 The Ancient Maya Ballcourt at Pacbitun, Belize. Ancient Mesoamerica,
Vol. 3, pp. 229-239.

Hill, Warren D. and John E. Clark
2001 Sports, Gambling, and Government: America's First Social Compact?

American Anthropologist, Vol. 103 No. 2, pp. 331-345.

Horcasitas, Fernando and Doris Heyden, translators
1971 Book of the Gods and Rites of the Ancient Calendar by Fray Diego Duran.
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman

110

Houk, Brett A.
1996 The Archaeology of Site Planning: An Example from the Maya Site of
Dos Hombres, Belize. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Texas at Austin.

Hulme, Derick L. Jr.
1990 The Political Olympics: Moscow, Afghanistan, and the 1980 US Boycott.
Praeger, New York.

International Travel Maps
2001 Belize. ITMB, Vancouver, British Columbia.

Jackson, Steven and Klaus Meier
1999 Hijacking the Hyphenated Signifier: Donovan Bailey and the Politics of
Racial and National Identity in Canada. In Anthropology, Sport, and Culture,
edited by Robert R. Sands, pp. 173-188. Bergin and Garvey, Westport,
Connecticut.

Jamison, Thomas R. and Gregory A. Wolff
1994 Excavations in and around Plaza A-I and Plaza A-II. In Xunantunich

Archaeological Project 1994 Field Season, edited by Richard Leventhal
and Wendy Ashmore, pp. 28-36. Submitted to the Department of
Archaeology, Belmopan, Belize.

111

J eakle, Julie E.
2002 Social Integration and the Maya: The Multifunctionality ofMesoamerican
Ball Courts. Masters Thesis, New Mexico State University.

Jeakle, Julie, Lisa J. Lucero and Sarah Field
2002 SC-3: A Minor Center Temple Ball Court. In Results of the 2001 Valley

of Peace Archaeology Project: Saturday Creek and Yalbac, edited by Lisa
J. Lucero. Submitted to the Department of Archaeology, Belmopan,
Belize.

Jones, Christopher
1985 The Rubber Ball Game. Expedition, Vol. 27, No. 2., pp. 44-52.

Kerr, Justin
n.d. Kerr Number: 8622. Electronic document,
http://research.famsi.org/kerrmaya_ list.php? _ allSearch=&hold_ search=&vase_ nu
mber=8622&date_added=&ms_ number=&site=&icon_ elements%5B%5D=God+
D%2C+Itzamnah&x=0&y=0, accessed March 23, 2006. Maya Vase Database.

Kertzer, David I.
1988 Ritual, Politics and Power. Yale University Press, New Haven, Connecticut.

112

Lalonde, Dane
2002 Ixno'ha 2002 Season Excavation Summary. In Blue Creek Regional

Political Ecology Project: 2001 and 2002 Research Summaries, edited by Jon C.
Lohse, pp. 48-50. Submitted to the Department of Archaeology, Belmopan,
Belize.

Leyenaar, Ted J. J.
2001 The Modem Ballgames of Sinaloa: A Survival of the Aztec Ullamaliztli. In

The Sport ofLife and Death, edited by Michael Whittington, pp. 122-129. Thames
and Hudson, New York.

Lohse, Jon C., Jimmy Barrera and Antonio Padilla
2004 2004 Season Excavations in the Gran Cacao Ballcourt, Northwestern Belize.
Electronic document,
http://www.mayaresearchprogram.org/content/BC_ 2004_Report_ballcourt.pdf,
accessed March 23, 2006. Maya Research Program.

Lucero, Lisa J.
2002 Ritual and Power in the Valley of Peace Area: 2001 Field Season. In Results

of the 2001 Valley of Peace Archaeology Project: Saturday Creek and Yalbac,
edited by Lisa J. Lucero, pp. I-7. Submitted to the Department of Archaeology,
Belmopan, Belize.

113

2003 Exploring Maya Politics: Yalbac, Central Belize. In Results of the 2002

Valley ofPeace Archaeology Project: Yalbac, pp. 1-17. Submitted to the
Department of Archaeology, Belmopan, Belize.

2004 The 2003 Season at Yalbac: The Ball Court and Acropolis. In Results of the

2003 Valley of Peace Archaeology Project: Yalbac, pp. 1-8. Submitted to the
Department of Archaeology, Belmopan, Belize.

McDougaJ, Steven R.
1997 Archaeological Investigations at Ballcourt 2, Dos Hombres, Belize.
Master's Thesis, University of Cincinnati.

McGovern, James 0.
1993 Survey and Excavation at Actuncan. In Xunantunich Archaeology Project

1994 Field Season, edited by Richard Leventhal and Wendy Ashmore, pp.
109-113. UCLA and Belize Department of Archaeology, Los
Angeles and Belmopan.

1994 Actuancan, Belize: the 1994 Excavation Season. In Xunantunich

Archaeological Project 1994 Field Season, edited by Richard Leventhal
and Wendy Ashmore, pp. 108-122. UCLA and Belize Department of
Archaeology, Los Angeles and Belmopan.

114

Martin, Simon and Nikolai Grube
2000 Chronicle of the Maya Kings and Queens. Thames and Hudson, New York.

Miller, Mary and Stephen Houston
1987 The Classic Maya Ballgame and its Architectural Setting. Res No. 14, pp. 4765.

Miller, Mary and Simon Martin
2004 Courtly Art of the Ancient Maya. Thames and Hudson, New York.

Morley, Sylvanus Griswold
1937 The Insciptions of Peten, Vol. 5, Part 2. Carnegie Institution of
Washington, publication number 437.

Nadal, Laura Filloy
2001 Rubber and Rubber Balls in Mesoamerica. In The Sport ofLife and Death,
edited by Michael Whittington, pp. 20-31. Thames and Hudson, New York.

Pozorski, Thomas and Shelia Pozorski
1995 An I-Shaped Ball-Court Form at Pampa de las Llamas-Moxeke, Peru. Latin

American Antiquity, Vol. 6, No. 3, 274-280.

115

Robichaux, Hubert R., Alexandra Miller, Evans Roberts III, Candace Pruett, Benjamin
Smyth, and Thomas O'Brien
2001 Punta de Cacao Archaeological Project: the 2001 Season Report.
Electronic document. www.uiwtx.edu/%7Ecacao/cool.html, accessed December
15, 2005. University of the Incarnate Word.

Romano, David Gilman
1985 Boycotts, Bribes and Fines. Expedition Vol. 27 No. 2., pp. 10-21.

Sands, Robert R.
1999 Anthropology and Sport. In Anthropology, Sport, and Culture, edited by
Robert R. Sands, pp. 3-13. Bergin and Garvey, Westport, Connecticut.

Santley, Robert S., Michael J. Berman, and Roni T. Alexander
1991 The Politicization of the Mesoamerican Ballgame and Its Implications for the
Interpretation of the Distribution ofBallcourst in Central Mexico. In The

Mesoamerican Ballgame, edited by Vernon L. Scarborough and David R. Wilcox,
pp. 3-24. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Scarborough, Vernon L.
1991 Courting the Southern Maya Lowlands: a Study in Pre-Hispanic Ballgame
Architecture. In The Mesoamerican Ballgame, edited by Vernon L.

116

Scarborough and David R. Wilcox, pp. 129-144. University of Arizona
Press, Tucson.

Schele, Linda
1987 The Figures on the Central Marker of Bal/court Allb at Copan. Copan Note
13.

Schele, Linda and David Freidel
1991 The Courts of Creation: Ballcourts, Ballgames, and Portals to the Maya
Otherworld. In The Mesoamerican Ballgame, edited by Vernon L. Scarborough
and David R. Wilcox, pp. 289-315. University of Arizona Press, Tucson

Schele, Linda and Nikolai Grube
1990 Six Staired Bal/courts. Copan Note 83.

Schele, Linda and Peter Mathews
1979 The Bodega of Palenque, Chiapas, Mexico. Dumbarton Oaks, Washington,
D.C.

Schele, Linda and Mary Miller
1986 The Blood ofKings: Dynasty and Ritual in Maya Art. Kimbell Art Museum,
Fort Worth, Texas.

117

Schultz, Kevan C., Jason J. Gonzalez, and Norman Hammond
1994 Classic Maya Ballcourts at La Milpa, Belize. Ancient Mesoamerica,
Vol. 5, pp. 45-53.

Sharer, Robert J.
th

2006 The Ancient Maya, 6 ed. Stanford University Press, California.

Shaw, Leslie C. and Eleanor M. King
2003 Report of the 2003 Archaeological Investigations at Maax Na, Belize.
Paper in position of the authors.

Silverman, Sydel
1981 Rituals of Inequality: Stratification and Symbol in Central Italy. In Social

Inequality: Comparative and Developmental Approaches, edited by Gerald D.
Berreman, pp. 163-181. Academic Press, New York.

Smith, Ledyard A.
1961 Types of Ball Courts in the Highlands of Guatemala. In Essays in Pre-

Columbian Art and Archaeology, edited by Samuel K. Lothrop, pp. 100-125.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Snyder, Louis L.

118

1976 Varieties ofNationalism: A Comparative Study. Holt, Rinehart and Winston,
New York.

Stem, Theodore
1950 The Rubber-Ball Games of the Americas. Monographs of the American
Ethnological Society No. 17. J.J. Augustin, New York.

Stoddard, Brian
1995 Caribbean Cricket: the role of sport in emerging small-nation politics. In

Liberation Cricket: West Indian Cricket Culture, edited by Hilary McD. Beckles
and Brian Stoddard, pp. 239-255. Manchester University Press, United Kingdom.

Stuart, David
1987 Ten Phonetic Syllables. Research Reports in Ancient Maya Writing, No.
14. Center for Maya Research, Washington, D.C.
2004 The Language of Chocolate: Notes on Cacao Glyphs and "Recipes" on
Classic Maya Ceramics. Unpublished paper in possession of the author.

Sullivan, Lauren A. and Kerry L. Sagebiel
2003 Changing Political Alliances in the Three Rivers Region In Heterarchy,

Political Economy, and the Ancient Maya: The Three Rivers Region of the EastCentral Yucatan Peninsula, pp. 25-36. University of Arizona

Press, Tucson.

119

Taladoire, Eric
1981 Les Terrains de Jeu de Balle (Mesoamerique et Sud-ouest de Etats-Unis).
Mission archeologique et ethnologique fran9aise au Mexique, Mexico,
D.F.

2001 The Architectural Background to the Pre-Hispanic Ballgame: an
Evolutionary Perspective. In The Sport ofLife and Death, edited by E.
Michael Whittington, pp. 97-115. Thames and Hudson, New York.

Taschek, Jennifer T. and Joseph W. Ball
1999 Las Ruinas de Arena!: Preliminary report on a subregional major center in the
western Belize Valley (1991-1992 excavations). Ancient Mesoamerica, Vo. 10,
pp. 215-235.

Thomas, David Hurst
1986 Refiguring Anthropology: First Principles ofProbability and Statistics.
Waveland Press, Inc., Prospect Heights, Illinois.

Thompson, Eric J.
1939 Excavations at San Jose, British Honduras. Carnegie Institution of
Washington, publication no. 506.

Tokovinine, Alexandre

120

2002 Divine Patrons of the Maya Ballgame. Electronic document,
www.mesoweb.com/features/tokovinine/Ballgame.pdf, accessed March 23, 2006.
Mesoweb publication.

n.d. Some ideas about "number+nab" compound. Electronic document,
http://www.mayavase.com/alex/alexanswer.html, accessed March 23, 2006. Maya
Vase Database.

Von Euw, Eric and Graham, Ian
1984 Corpus ofMaya Hieroglyphic Inscriptions, Vol 5, Part 2. Harvard
University Press.

Walling, Stanley L.
n.d. The Site ofChawak But'o'ob and the Rio Bravo Archaeological Survey
Project. Electronic document,
http://www.chss.montclair.edu/archaeology/riobravo.htrnl, accessed March 23,
2006

Wernecke, D. Clark
1993 Interpretations of Architecture at El Pilar: Results of the 1993 Season.
Electronic document,
http ://mare. ucsb .edu/elpilar/fieldreports/l 993report/1993 _report.html, accessed
March 23, 2006. BRASS/El Pilar Program.

121

Wikipedia contributors
2006 Forza Italia. Electronic document, http://en.wikipedia.org1wiki/Forza_Italia,
accessed March 23, 2006. Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia.

Zender, Marc
2001 Comments by Marc Zender on Vase K7749. Electronic document,
http://www.mayavase.com/com7749.html, accessed March 23, 2006. Maya Vase
Database.

2004 Sport, Spectacle, and Political Theater: New Views of the Classic Maya
Ballgame. The PARI Journal Vol. 4, No. 4, pp. 10-12.

Zender, Marc and Joel Skidmore
2004 New Ballcourt Marker from Cancuen. Electronic document,
http://www.mesoweb.com/reports/cancuen_altaT.html, accessed March 23, 2006.
Mesoweb report.

122

