Anthropology Senior Theses

University of Pennsylvania

ScholarlyCommons
Department of Anthropology

Spring 2008

Facebook Trends: Understanding Intagible Cultural Ties Through
a Virtual Community
Jessica Palay
University of Pennsylvania

Follow this and additional works at: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses

Q

Part of the Anthropology Commons

Recommended Citation
Palay, Jessica, "Facebook Trends: Understanding Intagible Cultural Ties Through a Virtual Community"
(2008). Anthropology Senior Theses. Paper 94.

This paper is posted at ScholarlyCommons. https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/94
For more information, please contact repository@pobox.upenn.edu.

Facebook Trends: Understanding Intagible Cultural Ties Through a Virtual
Community
Disciplines
Anthropology

This thesis or dissertation is available at ScholarlyCommons: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/94

University of Pennsylvania
Office of Regulatory Aff£1irs
Yvonne Higgins, Director Human Research Proleclions
Emma Meagher, MD, IRB Executive Chair
3624 Market SI., Suite 301 S
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6006
Ph: 215-573-2540/ Pax: 215-573•9438

INSTlTUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD
(Federalwide Assurance# 00004028)
19-Mar-2008

Clark El'ickson
University Museum
University of Pennsylvania

33rd and Spruce Streets
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6398
cerick,so@sas.upenn.edu
ATIN: Jessica Palay
jpalay@sas.upenn.edu
PRINCJPAL!NVESTIOATOR: CLARK ERICKSON
TITLE
: Foo.book Trends [SPI.: Jessica C. Palay}
SPONSORING AGENCY
: NO SPONSOR NUMBER
PROTOCOL#
: 807736
REVIEW BOARD
: lRB#8

Dear Dr Erickson:
The above-referenced research proposal was reviewed by the Instlwtlonal Review Board (IRB) on 19-Mar-2008. It has
been derennined that the proposal meets eJigibJUty criteria for ffiB re-view exemption authorized by 45 CFR 46.101,
category 2.

This does not necessarily constitute authorir.ation to initiate the conduct of a human subject research study. You
are responsible for assming other relevant committee app~ovals.
The IRB exemption for thls study ls limited to three (3) yenrS, nfter which nn application for continuing review will be
necessary if the stu(ly is to be continued. During I.he 3~year exemption period you nre required to notify the lRB if any
changes are proposed in lhe study tlmt might oiler its lRB exempt status or HlP AA compliance status.
You will be sent a notice of expiration for this proposal before 18-Mar-2011.
lt is the responsibility of the principal investigator to keep the IRB apprised of any and a11 changes in the research thal
may have an impact on the IRB review mechanism needed for a specific pn>po$ul. New procedures that may hove un
impact on the risk-to-benefit ratio cannot be initiated until Committee approval has been given.
If this protocol involves cancer research with human subject.'>, biospecimens, or data, you may not begin the research
until you have obtained approval or proof of exemption from the Cancer Center's Clinical Trials Review aud

Monitoling Committee,
If you hnve any questions about the information in this letter, pfoase contact the lRB adminlstratlve staff. Contact
information is available at our website: hUp://www,upenn.cdu/regulatoryaffairs/Contact.htm1.
Thank you for your oooperation,

I ~

i\dministrator

FACEBOOK TRENDS:
UNDERSTANDING INTAGIBLE CULTURAL TIES
THROUGH A VIRTUAL COMMUNITY
By
Jessica Palay
In
Anthropology
Submitted to the
Department of Anthropology
University of Pennsylvania
Thesis Advisor: Dr. Louise Krasniewicz

2008

Abstract
Community is an important component to human life, creating the social bonds
necessary for society to function. Yet communities come in many shapes and forms.
With the advent of technology, virtual social networking sites have gained in popularity,
such as Facebook. The question becomes, is Facebook a community and if so, is it the
same as a physical community? To answer this, the theory of gift giving as a way of
forming social bonds and therefore communities was employed to determine if such
things occurred on Facebook. Three different forms of exchange were examined: gift
giving, poking and wall writing. Through interviews and observation, the data suggests
that these virtual behaviors acted on the same principles of reciprocity exhibited in
physical communities. Thus, Facebook is a community as much as a small town in
Indiana is. Despite changes in technology, human behavior essentially remains the same.

Jessica Palay
Thesis
Facebook Trends:
Understanding intangible cultural ties through a vittual community
Introduction
Humans are social animals. As such, we form communities in which we live our
lives and interact with others. Yet, what exactly defines a community? This question has
consumed anthropologists for decades as they have observed group behavior. By
entering into specific social groups and observing from the inside, they have tried to
understand what makes a community. Since the late 1800s, the beginning of academic
anthropology, anthropologists have studied societies in attempt to understand how
different communities work (Barrett 1984:4). As Richard Barrett explains, "When an
anthropologist writes about a people, it is with the assuredness that comes with intitnate
association" (1984:3). From these close observations, anthropologists have defined and
continue to define what formulates a community.
A community, first and foremost, is defined by its own self perception. Anderson
Benedict explicates, "Communities are to be distinguished, not by their
falsity/genuineness, but by the style in which they are imagined" (1991 :6). Communities
exist because their members recognize them as an entity. They therefore must be
evaluated in their own terms. The physical community cannot exist without the cultural
meanings within the members' heads. Community, or social capital, as Robert Putnam
calls it interchangeably, has to do with social connections (2000:21 ). To him, social
capital consists of the amount and types of relationships that one has with others; how
one creates networks. These networks are based on reciprocity; for the "norm of
generalized reciprocity is so fundamental to civilized life that all prominent moral codes

1

contain some equivalent of the Golden Rule" (2000: 135). The idea to do unto others as
you would have them do unto you is the cornerstone of building a community. Since
social ties outline the bonds of a community, it is important to maintain healthy
relationships.

Community and the Modern World
Community is a loaded term. While it implies a group of people bonded together
by a common denominator, it allows for a plethora of definitions and groupings.
Traditionally, a community defined itself by locality and interactions between people
within a distinct physical space. With the advent of technology, however, this has started
to change. Air travel enables people to traverse the globe in hours while cell phones and
email make communication instantaneous and readily available. The internet, in
particular, has shaped this transformation. In today's terms, it means that a person can
belong to multiple communities: by location, education, religion, hobbies, lifestyles and
more. Electronic mail, instant messaging, online phone services like Skype and
networking sites provide venues to make and maintain connections. Networking sites are
the most noteworthy in their attempt to create communities outside the physical sphere,
creating a virtual space for people to interact. A lot of attention has been paid to these
webpages, sparking debates over the "authenticity" of such sites: are they truly a
community or simply a substitute for the physical ones that people live in?
Whether replacing one's physical community with a virtual one is socially healthy
or not, websites such as MySpace and Facebook have been gaining in popularity in terms
of both users and media attention. Facebook especially commands much attention
through its membership growth and constant innovation. But while the media focuses on

2

its profitability and amazes over its popularity, the mechanisms behind Facebook's
success has not been properly studied. The question becomes not what makes Facebook
so successful but why? From an anthropological perspective, this means determining
whether Facebook is a community. That is, does it represent and encompass its own
unique and sustainable community? And if so, is it the same as a physical community?
Many different elements come together to form a functioning community: a
prevailing social structure, division oflabor, forms of communication and prescribed
modes of relationships. More recently overlooked is the role of gift-giving and
reciprocity in creating and maintaining social bonds. As our society shifts toward a more
virtual world, such practices should move as well. While traditional exchange involves
the passing of tangible objects from one to the other, anthropological theory has long
contended that it is the invisible meanings, obligations and associations attached to the
gift that create relationships. The classic example of lending a neighbor a cup of sugar
illustrates this point. While one gives the sugar freely, it is implied that at some point, the
neighbor will lend you something in return. On Facebook, pixels, gestures and words are
exchanged, which possibly carries the same meanings that a cup of sugar does. Three
options on Facebook will be used to explore this idea: gift giving, poking and wall
writing. I hope to prove that each of these actions is done with specific social intentions
and requires some sort of response on behalf of the recipient.
So is Facebook just as real of a community as a small African village? By
studying the role of reciprocity on Facebook, I hope to determine whether it exhibits the
same sorts of exchange in the virtual world as found in the physical.

The Gift: The Theory Behind It

3

The theory of gift-giving was codified by Marcel Mauss in his 1925 work, The
Gift: Forms and Functions ofExchange in Archaic Societies. While he focused on

reciprocity in archaic societies, his ideas can be applied to behaviors exhibited on today.

In applying it to his own time, he writes that, "The theme of the gift, of freedom and
obligation in the gift, of generosity and self-interest in giving, reappear in our own
society like the resurrection of a dominant motif long forgotten" (Mauss 1967 :66). This
idea again today has been overlooked despite its significance to community-building.
Commonly used in social interactions, its frequent employment numbs people from
realizing its importance. That is why it is crucial to highlight how it functions in society
today. Yet before delving too deep; it is important to understand Mauss' theory and how
it works to explain social interactions.
On the surface, giving a gift serves little practical purpose. It is costly, both in
time and resources, and warrants no immediate return or benefit to the donor. Despite
this, gift giving occurs across time and culture from the ancient Greeks' xenia
(hospitality) to an American child's birthday party. In studying culture, there are few
things that all societies have in common. The prevalence of gift exchange thus makes it a
noteworthy occurrence. This seemingly pointless action therefore must have some
underlying principle or it would not exist universally. As Mauss comments, "In theory
such gifts are voluntary but in fact they are given and repaid under obligation" (1967:1).
The key to these types of exchange is that it creates a sense of indebtedness in the
recipient towards the giver. Essentially, the invisible strings attached to the object give
the gift its social consequence.

4

Unlike most exchanges, gifts do not have to be reciprocated immediately. For
example, a friend might give another friend a birthday card. This seemingly altruistic
gesture, while not pressing, does require an appropriate response: a return card on the
donor's birthday. Mauss explains, "The other characteristic shows the danger of
receiving the pledge. For it is not only the person who gives it that is bound, but also the
one who receives it" (1967:61). In this way, gift exchange is active on both ends in terms
of social meaning. The beneficiary appears to be the passive one in the deed but by
accepting the gift, he becomes an active part of the social web. Thus both the giving and
receiving of gifts work to solidify the relationship between the two participants.
The relationship formed between the donor and the recipient varies based on the
nature of the gift. It can show social superiority placing the receiver as the giver's
subordinate if the gift is greater than the receiver can repay. In addition, it can be an
exchange among equals (i.e. birthday cards)-or by refusing to accept a gift or failing to
reciprocate-an insult. These actions live in the intangible; Mauss puts it best when he
says, "Much of our everyday morality is concerned with the question of obligation and
spontaneity in the gift ... Things have values which are emotional as well as material;
indeed in some cases the values are entirely emotional" (1967:63). When examining
Facebook, it is the emotional meaning behind these exchanges that hold its significance.
Beyond Mauss: A Modem Look At An Old Theory
Since Mauss debuted his theory, others have added important insights to the
concept of gift-giving. While this paper will mainly focus on Mauss' original thoughts,
an overview of more modem thinking will be provided. Claude Levi-Strauss, the father
of structuralism, presents a well thought-out commentary on Mauss' theory in his

5

Introduction to the Work ofMarcel Mauss. In explaining the symbolic nature of gift

exchange he writes, "So no society is ever wholly and completely symbolic, that is
because a society is always a spatial-temporal give, and therefore subject to the impact of
other societies and earlier states of its own development" (1987:17). Each society builds
on the next-thus new meanings are tied to previous ones. Its novel form rests on the
foundation of conventional society.
Like Mauss, Levi-Strauss focuses on the symbolic nature of gifts. The
relationship building attribute to exchange fascinated him. He asks, rhetorically, "Does
this property exist objectively, like a physical property of the exchanged goods?
Obviously not. That would in any case be impossible, since the goods in question are not
only physical objects, but also dignities, responsibilities, privileges-whose sociological
role is nonetheless the same as that of material goods" (1987:46). According to Levi Strauss, the social components of the action as just as real as the transfer of the physical
goods. Culture not only encompasses the objects created and used by a group but also
the ideas behind the objects; how its made, its use, its disposal, etc. Therefore gifts
contain more than their physical dimensions, they carry additional meaning.
Since Levi-Strauss, others have also looked at gift-giving in social contexts; their
ideas will be highlighted as this paper unfolds. But like his idea that no society can
develop independently of others, these later thinkers all built upon the revolutionary ideas
of Mauss and Levi-Strauss.

What is Facebook?
Facebook is one of many social networking sites. While originally created for
college students, is now open to anyone who has an email account. Its purpose is to

6

connect people. According to the site, "Facebook is a social utility that connects people
with friends and others who work, study and live around them. People use Facebook to
keep up with friends, upload an unlimited number of photos, share links and videos, and
learn more about the people they meet." This social utility, as it is stated, is used to
enhance local relationships and maintain existing ones (especially over long distances).
To enter Facebook, users go to www forPhonk rnm . Once on the Welcome to
Facebook page, members log in by typing in their email address and password (Figure 1).
Users become members by signing up with a specific network (or none at all) and
creating a password which must be typed in order to access the site. These networks can
be schools, companies, cities and countries. Once a member, the user can create a profile
(Figure 2) describing their interests, put up a picture, and "friend" other people (Figure
3). Users' friends show up on the left-hand side of the profile page. Friending a person
gives a user access to their profile if the friend is on another network or has restricted his
or her profile to only friends. It also usually recognizes a friendship that exists outside of
the website.
In addition to making friends, Facebook has a multitude of applications that allow
for users to interact with one another. They have become increasingly complex with
features including popular games like Oregon Trail and the ability to upload photos and
"tag" people in them which link the photos to their profiles. Users can also send private
messages to one another by clicking the "Send [name] a message" button located below
the person's picture. These messages show up in the user's inbox which can be accessed
by clicking on the Inbox button at the top of the screen. They can also create or join
groups. These groups show up on the user's profile and can represent political interests,

7

inside jokes, and physical groups like community service trips. By clicking on the name
of a user's group, one is taken to the group homepage which can feature links, pictures
and discussions. In these ways, Facebook allows users to forge their own identities and
create/display social bonds.
There are also many public forms of exchange. Members can give gifts to their
friends. To do that, the user visits the gift shop page where they can chose from hundreds
of gifts (Figure 4). Availability fluctuates in minutes: one click said 467 gifts options
were available, a click a moment later only 371 options were. After selecting the icon, the
recipient's name is typed in and a message can be included. The icon and message then
shows up on the recipient's profile (Figure 5). Another application is called poking.
Essentially, when a user views someone's profile, they have the option to click on a
button that says, "Poke [name]." When that person next logs onto Facebook, on the left
hand side of their homepage, it will tell them who poked them and give them the option
of poking back or ignoring it (Figure 6). In addition, wall writing is a popular feature.
This application allows people to post messages on a user's wall. The wall is located on
the user's profile page below the rest of his or her information (Figure 7). Along with the
message, the writer's picture is shown beside it. While there are many other options
available to users, these three features are the applications that will be examined in this
study.
History ofFacebook
Facebook, for all its social significance, is relatively young. Its brief history
attests to the power of preexisting social networks and the ease of communication
brought about by the internet. Understanding the history of the theory of gift-giving only

8

clarifies one half of my contention. By studying the history of Facebook, its impact can
be better appreciated.
Founded in February of2004 by Mark Zuckerberg, Dustin Moskovitz and Chris
Hughes in their Harvard dorm room, Facebook now has over 70 million active users
according to the site. As it has grown in membership, it has also grown in applications.
Facebook started off a lot simpler in nature. The wall writing feature was not added until
September of 2004. By December of that year, Facebook reached one million users. In
August of 2005, Facebook officially changed its name from www t h Pforph nnk- rnn, to
Facebook, a term that it was already being referred by. From September 2005 to 2006,
Facebook continually expanded opening up to high schools, international schools and
workplaces, eventually becoming accessible to anyone who wants to join. This expansion
of social networks allowed for Facebook to grow to 70 million active users today and,
according to comScore, makes it the second most trafficked social networking site in the
world after MySpace (2007). Its enormous popularity is what makes it such an
intriguing source of study.
While wall writing was added soon after Facebook was developed, the gift shop
feature began in February of 2007. An interesting thing to note is that poking does not
appear on the development timeline or the application description sections of the site.
Poking, as it will be discussed later, has a more ambiguous role in the Facebook world.
These applications are some of the older forms of exchange found on Facebook. Because
of this, they have had more time to become an ingrained part of the culture and therefore
were chosen for examination. Since May 2007, Facebook has opened up to other
applications developed outside of the company("'"'"' forPhnnk- rnm). In October 2007,

9

Microsoft bought a $240 million dollar stake in Facebook which valued the company at
$15 billion (Vara 2008). This transaction represents the business sector's realization of
the popularity and power ofFacebook.
But while newspapers like the Wall Street Journal are concerned with the
potential profitability ofFacebook, other publications, like Wired Magazine have looked
at the more social aspects of the site. In this case, Scott Brown (2008) talks about the
identities that people construct for themselves on Facebook versus one's real self. What
he points out is through tracking sites such as Beacon, the real "you" is revealed. What he
fails to note, is that in every society particular roles are played whether online or in the
classroom. As Geertz explicates, "In a ritual, the world as lived and the world as
imagined, fused under the agency of a single set of symbolic forms, tum out to be the
same world, producing thus that idiosyncratic transformation in one's sense ofreality"
(13). Participation in exchange-driven activities on Facebook mirrors ritual action.
Similarly, how one interacts with others on Facebook is telling of its social structure. By
looking at forms of exchange on Facebook, I hope to prove that what is real on Facebook
is also real in our physical communities.

Research Methods
All the subjects in the study were students enrolled at the same university. A
mixture of years was used although most of the participants were in their final year. This
was done because they had the most exposure to Facebook while being college students.
In addition, they were the first generation of college students to have Facebook for all
four years. It was about 50 percent female and 50 percent male from various groups who
all interact in a general social scene. Although more social diversity could have lent

10

more insight, due to the limited scope of the project, the parameters had to be contained
so a more cohesive conclusion could be drawn.
The subjects have all been given pseudonyms to protect their pdvacy. In addition,
everything posted on Facebook is public information put up by people who expect it to be
read by others. Thus most of my infmmation came from the public domain. Interviews
were conducted similarly with all identifying information obscured. As a public forum,
Facebook has implemented various levels of security to ensure that people can chose how
public or pdvate they want their information to be. But in all cases, the identities of the
subjects have been protected.

Gift Application: How the Gift works in the virtual world

'., I

1~.41! z':

[Examples of gifts found on Facebook]

Gift-giving on Facebook is the most obvious example of exchange on the website.
Created in February of 2007, they are designed by Susan Kare, the original developer of
the Macintosh icons in 1983 ('"'-""""' f 'lrPhnnlr

rnm ) .

With hundreds of options to choose

from, these pictures vary from hugging teddy bears, to a glass of beer, to pii'iatas. Giving
a gift to someone else on Facebook involves buying an icon from the Facebook Gift Shop
and posting it on the recipient's profile page. An optional message can be included along
with the gift. This message can be made private and also anonymous so only the recipient
can see that information. The message and giver appears with the icon under the
recipient's gift section on his of her profile. Each gift costs the giver one dollar. Many
gifts are limited edition which means once they are sold out; no more can be purchased

11

making them more exclusive. If a gift is a limited edition, the amount left is indicated
under the icon below the price. For the sake of simplicity, the icons designed by Susan
Kare and sold by Facebook will be the only gifts studied.
The cultural behavior of giving gifts precedes Facebook. In fact, it can be found in
many different cultures. For example, according to Malinowski, the kula ring of the
Trobriand Islands exhibits the same traits of gift giving that Facebook does (Mauss
1967:19). The kula ring is a giant inter-tribal trade route. Enveloping all the Trobriand
isles, it is an aristocratic trade in which vcygu 'a, currency is exchanged. There are two
types, mwali (armshells) and soulava (necklaces). The armshells travel from west to east
while the necklaces travel from east to west: thus they continue to circulate (Mauss
1967:20-22). The only difference between Facebook gifts and the gifts of that people of
the Trobriand Islands is that one exists in the physical realm while the other exists in the
world of pixels and urls. Like the Trobtiands, gift giving is done by the generous. Costing
a dollar a gift, one must be prepared to spend money on something that in reality does not
exist. Thus it is the symbolic meaning of the gift that must be of value.
Facebook users are very much aware of gift giving etiquette. "Jenna," a senior girl
when explaining why she and her friends do not receive gifts comments, "None ofus
give them, so none ofus get them." "Hannah," a junior would agree, "never given a gift
nor received one-no one likes me" [laughs]. While they cannot fully articulate it, both
women are not surprised that they have not received any gifts, since they do not give
them. Aafke Komter writes that "gift exchange is a self-sustaining system: those who
refuse to take part in it place themselves outside the community" (2005: 118). Thus
"Harmab's" joke that "no one likes me" reflects this idea that she is outside a certain

12

community by not participating in gift exchange. They understand, whether they realize it
or not, the theory of reciprocity. The main trend in gift giving on Facebook can be
divided into two main categories: gifts from love interests and gifts from friends.
Romantic gift giving is a way of creating more intimacy between two people.
When talking about his gifting habits, "Barry" reveals, "With my girlfriend, I gave her a
gift first and then she gave me one. I responded with a wall post." "Johnny" also has
received gifts from his "hook-ups." "Stacey" also said that she gives gifts to "my
boyfriend for inside jokes. He doesn't reciprocate but he'll text me or mentions it on the
phone." When asked about it, her boyfriend, "Harry" replied that, "I really like it when
Stacey gives me gifts, I felt loved, appreciated-no that's the wrong word--cared about,
part of the clan like. I enjoy getting Facebook things." The act of giving the gift made
"Harry" feel more attached to "Stacey." While he never sent her back a gift, he did
respond by posting on her wall, or calling her to express his gratitude. Komter writes,
"things derive their meaning from their place and role within relationships" (2005 :3 3). So
even though romantic gifts appear very similar to other types of gifts since they usually
involve inside jokes, it is the context in which they are given that makes them romantic.
Essentially, the subjects use gifts as a vehicle to mark one's relationship.
But gifts are also employed in a more casual context between friends. For the
most part, users will send and receive gifts between close friends. "Barry" amazes, "I
find it interesting how people need it to establish friendships, especially between the
Kappa girls. Gifts are like wall posts on steroids." In this particular social circle, gift
giving is a way to maintain friendships. Komter believes that mixed motives between the
giver and the receiver typify the exchange. In particular, both the giver and receiver want

13

to be generous but also recognized (Osteen 2002: 17). The public display of gifts on one's
profile suits this desire of recognition weJI since anyone who views the recipient's profile
will see the gift. One Kappa girl who has given five gifts explains, "I've received gifts
from my littles in my sorority, like inviting me to Miami. One did one randomly-it was
a purse with an animal inside and she had written: "come to Smokes! [a popular bar on
campus] It's funny and feels good when I see it there." Invitations and inside jokes along
with the gifts help to solidify their relationships while having many gifts makes one feel
socially appreciated.
"Zorro" relates his own experiences, "One girl gave me one first and then I gave
her one. That's how I heard about giving gifts. The other girl, I gave her a gift first. I
thought, "this is fun" I laughed, it felt good to be thought about by this person. So I
responded by giving a gift back." In this situation "Zorro" first reciprocated by sending a
gift to his original giver, before initiating his own gift exchange. This feeling of pleasure
brought about by the gift, cemented a social bond between "Zorro" and his friends. Like
"Zorro," most of"Johnny's" gifts are from female home friends. For most guys, gifts
come from home friends while for the women the gifts were more mixed between coJJege
and non-college friends.
Sometimes gifts can be used in more socially ambiguous situations. "Jenna"
explains, "I once gave a gift to my lab coworker. I knew him well enough to
acknowledge his birthday but not well enough to buy him a gift. I got him a mouse
because we had just done animal training that day." In this situation, giving a gift online
solved her dilemma: how to handle an acquaintance's birthday. Putnam would agree that
"the forms of our social capital-the ways in which we connect with friends and

14

neighbors and strangers-are varied" (2000:27). Since "Jenna's" coworker was
somewhere between stranger and friend, a mtlque solution was needed. Giving an icon
was just personal enough without being intrusive. The gift provided the perfect
resolution to a socially sensitive situation.
Gifts are the most straightforward ofFacebook exchanges in comparison to
existing human behavior. Gifts-giving varies in popularity among Facebook users; for
some it helps build relationships while others consider it a waste of money. "Johnny"
puts it perfectly, "I've only gotten one gift from each person. Maybe because I'm not
saying "Thank you!" but it's nice to get a gift, even if it's a cyber one, not real but still a
gift. Respect." He sums it up pe1fectly: if a gift is not reciprocated, then the giver will
not continue to give gifts. As Jacques Derrida writes, the giving of a gift requires the
suspension of the expectation of reward. Yet, once the giver recognizes that he or she has
given a gift, there's a "symbolic recognition" which means that the gift is no longer given
freely (Osteen 2002:15). Thus despite the giver's generosity, reciprocation becomes
necessary to continue the relationship.

Poking: Getting attention in the virtual world
Pokes
You were poked by:
,-?
tp

po'~ oa-.: I 1emu '[Example of what a poke looks like on a user's homepage]

Poking mystifies most Facebook users although the application is quite simple. To
poke someone, one selects the "poke" icon in someone's profile. When the recipient logs
onto Facebook the next time, he or she is notified on their homepage that they have been
poked. He or she then has the option of poking back or ignoring it. If he or she pokes

15

back, the cycle starts all over again. Poking is one of the more ridiculed applications on
Facebook that nonetheless is extremely popular. Rebecca jokes, "Poking's annoying in
real life too" although she admits to using the application occasionally. Since it involves
no messages or gift-like icons, it is the closest thing to body language or physical
communication on Facebook.
It reminds me of a skit that was done doing New Student Orientation of my
freshman year early September of 2004. At this point, Facebook was still something of a
novelty. The skit involved one student running up to another and poking him. The
message was something to the effect of don't poke on Facebook, poke out here. Poking is
a "notice me" type gesture. It is generally done to either get the attention of the opposite
sex or between good friends as a joke. Either way, it is generally done between those with
great intimacy or desiring intimacy.
As the NSO joke reveals, poking on Facebook means placing an intennediary
between the poker and the poked. Similarly, in Samoa, a boy employs a soa, someone to
relay his message of interest to his intended lover (Mead 1928:89-90). The soa and
poking are both examples of indirect means or use of an intermediary to foster intimacy.
While poking does not necessarily have the same romantic intentions as the use of a soa,
both are used to create a social relationship. Like with gift-giving, poking is a fonn of
exchange. Ignoring a poke could be seen as an insult while responding too quickly could
be considered "creepy".
Poking, according to one source, is one of the more bizarre applications found on
Facebook. "I just don't really get it ... Yeah I've used it, but it's weird." When pressed
as to why she shrugged. It also is the only of the three applications under study that is not

16

mentioned on the Facebook product page. This either suggests its insignificance or
futility of trying to explain it in a meaningful way to an audience. Maurice Godelier
explains this confusion, "For a Western observer, this round trip seems senseless since, if
the thing is given right back, it seems to have been exchanged "for nothing"" (1999:44).
Since the only way to respond to a poke directly is to send one back to the giver, it seems
like the original poke was nullified. But while this is the perception of many Facebook
users, it is not the reality. Once a gift or a poke is given, it cannot be canceled. If the
original giver is poked back, the poke is actually being given again. Although they may
not understand the reasons behind poking, this explains why they continue to poke each
other.
There are several categories of poking; random flirting, random jokes and
intimate relationships. When a friend pokes another friend, it can be to get their attention
or to get into what is called a poking war. It can also be used to flirt, by getting
someone's attention. "Aaron," a senior, shares that, "Mainly girls poke me. Girls I'm
hooking up with, girls I've hooked up with, or girls who have indicated that they want
to." Here the girls express interest in "Aaron" by poking him. Similarly, "Zorro" recalls,
"I've been poked by random girls-girls I don't even know. It's awkward." For him,
random poking is strange; it is only acceptable when done by people he already knows.
Random flirting, for the most part, is deemed creepy. But that was not always the case,
especially in the user's earlier years of Facebook use. "Barry" tells that, "Freshman year
ifI met a girl I would poke her out of flirtatious interest, but not really anymore." When
poking was more novel, it was a more popular form of flirting. "Johnny" recalls that
Facebook used to define poking as a way of flirting.

17

Since flirting via poking is considered strange, poking can also be done as a prank
when done between friends. "Johnny" says, "Poking's pseudo.sexual I think. I've poked
a dude before, no homo. I do it to [male) friends from home, to joke pretend to say to
them "yo girl!"" "Johnny" mocks the flirting process by perverting it into a joke between
friends. Similarly, "Zorro" states that, "I've poked more guys than girls, I thought it was
funny. I go on friends profiles and poke every guy I can find." But that too is a form of
exchange that reveals a level of comfort between the giver and the recipient.
The last form of poking is the "poking war" in which people cannot stop poking
each other. "Amy," a junior, laughs, "I'm in an endless poke with my boyfriend; it
started when we weren't in a real relationship and now we can't stop. It's always there,
can't stop because it's rude." "Julie" also feels a sort of obligation to keep on poking
back. "With poking you can either poke back or ignore, I feel bad ignoring. I wish there
was a button that said, thanks and then end it." Other people continue the war for fear of
offending the other person. "Johnny" says that, "We've [him and his best friend "Taryn"
from home) been poking each other since we've been on Facebook, 5 years. With her, I
don't want to stop. Don't want to be the one to stop, it's mutual can't stop it's the nature
of the relationship, we've been best friends-she'd get mad because it's quitting and
would show a lack of dedication." At this point the poking interaction is a routine,
showing long.term continuity. To stop reciprocating at this point would be breaking with
certain obligations that come with "Johnny" and "Taryn's" friendship. The reason that
all these people feel the need to continue to poke back is that "the object which returns to
its original owner is not "given back, "but is "given again" ... thus binding two
individuals or two groups into a twin relationship of reciprocal dependence" (Godelier

18

1999:44). Therefore they cannot stop, or it would destroy this relationship of "reciprocal
dependence."
While Western society causes these users to ridicule poking as an ineffective form
of exchange, it actually has quite a hold on certain individuals. The poking relationship
can turn into one of mutual dependence, especially in cases where the two users are in
intimate relationships, either romantically or in a close friendship. Since poking suggests
a relationship of mutual dependence, pokes by random people is deemed " awkward and
uncomfortable." These social feelings of awkwardness are exploited when poking is
done as a joke. The users recognize how strange it is to receive a poke from an
unfamiliar person and therefore will deliberately poke them for amusement. This is a
perversion of an exchange that is for more intimate relationships.

Wall Writing: Public Messages in the virtual world
T The Wall
Displaying 10 of 321 wall posts

Wall -to-Wall See All

Write something . . .

Attach:

(w: Share Link

f;) Sox Talk

~ HYPERTEXT

l!:J Give a Birthday Gift to
[Example of how to post on a user's wall]

Wall writing is one of the older applications on Facebook and is used in a variety
of ways. Added as a feature in September of 2004, the wall, according to Facebook, "is a
forum for users' friends to post comments or insights about them. Users can always
remove comments they don't like from their own walls. They can restrict who can see
their wall, or turn it off entirely, by going to the "Profile" section of the Privacy page
01ttn-// 1.Vi.vw fo rPh nnk rnm /nrP<:<:/nmrinrt nhn).

19

While Facebook focuses more on the

privacy aspects of the wall, the focus here will remain on the content. To write on
someone's wall, a user clicks on the text box under the Wall section of the recipient's
profile. Once the user finishes his or her message, he or she clicks on the post button.
The message along with the writer's picture then appear on the recipient's wall.
Since wall writing involves posting messages on another's profile, it is a public
form of expression, making it visible to anyone who accesses that page. Messages range
from inside jokes, to birthday wishes to a means of updating people's lives (i.e. travel,
lunch plans, etc). It is a very open form of communication since anyone who has access
to the recipient's profile can view the message. Writing on one's wall using invokes the
necessity of the recipient to respond by posting back on the giver's wall. Depending on
the type of post, the time period between exchanges varies.
This public display of exchange of dialogue would be similar to papers written in
reaction to one another in an academic journal in which one scholar responds to another's
ideas in a public forum. This can also be seen in the form of rap battles between hip-hop
stars such as Nas and Jay-Z (Century 2002). Richard Seaford writes in terms of Homeric
poetry that, "The tendency of oral poetry to express and legitimate the interests and
aspirations of its audience is well documented" (1994:5). Similarly wall writing is a form
of communication between the writer and the audience: the recipient and his or her
friends.
Wall writing, like the other forms of exchange on Facebook can be divided into
subgroups. In this case several distinct types of wall writing can be observed:
jokes/keeping in touch between close friends, and random conversation starters. A third
and very interesting type to note, is the birthday post. Inside jokes with good friends used

20

to be the most popular type of wall writing. Most of the subjects recalled that they wrote
on people's walls more often earlier in their college career and noted that their younger
coeds and high schoolers seem to use it much more. Or as "Jenna" puts it, "My little
sister and her friends use the wall to ask about plans, it's so retarded." To the older
generation of Pacebook users like "Jenna," wall writing is for writing witty banter not for
conversations. Hence, more of a stigma surrounds wall postings that ask mundane
questions about someone's life. Words are the most basic form of exchange, a place
where ideas and witty words can be transferred (Godbout and Caille 1998:12-13). In
general, when this generation of Facebook users is examined, clever wall postings are
preferred over conversations.
Not all witty joking is welcomed. In fact, sometimes, the joking can be
embarrassing. "Sara" once considered erasing one such post. "I didn't delete it because I
thought it would be more noticeable ifl deleted. I was planning on writing something
embarrassing on her wall to call her out on something more embarrassing." But in the
end she did not follow through with her plan. When asked why, she explained that she
was afraid that her friend would counter with something even more embarrassing. F01ms
of exchange are not necessarily always for bettering social bonds, it can also be used to
damage them. "Sara's" situation can be likened to the relationship between the United
States and Russia during the Cold War: one of mutually assured destruction. In this case,
reciprocity is contemplated in a more vengeful sort of way.
Lack of reciprocation can also have negative consequences. In some instances,
wall posts are rejected because they offend the receiver. "Jenna" tells a story that, "I once
deleted a post from my cousin that said, "Are you as pissed as I am that we haven't

21

graduated yet?" It pissed me off so I waited until it was the second or third post down so
he wouldn't notice that I took it off. Although he hasn't posted on my wall since and he
used to do it a Jot." Since she rejected his initiation, he has not tried to offer a new one at
all, showing the power of rejection. Ignoring a wall post can be just as offensive. "Barry"
experienced this. "One girl once wrote on my wall and I didn't respond and then a week
later her friend came up to me and made a comment about it. That night I wrote back on
her wall. Like a conversation, people should reply to a post or it's like giving the cold
shoulder." His non response must have really bothered the girl if she ended up having
her friend say something to "Barry." While writing on someone's wall is supposed to be
"free," the expectation for a response is there. As Godbout and Caille say, "Social
cohesions changes at everyone moment; it becomes stronger or weaker as a function of
the countless decisions on the part of each member of a society to trust another member
by taking the risk that a gift will not be reciprocated" (1994:188). This shows how
important reciprocating on wall posts is in the Facebook community. By ignoring a post,
one ignores the offer of a social bond and relationships can be damaged.
The conversation, as termed by the subjects, is another form of wall writing.
Conversation is defined as writing done by people who post specific questions on
people's walls like, "What are you doing this summer?" or "I'm coming to LA, want to
hang out?" Most people interviewed feel that questions such as this are private and
should not be mentioned on a public venue such as a wall, which shows up on someone's
profile. As "Meg" vents, "It's a cop-out way of being personal that isn't being
personal ... Wall posting is supposed to be about inside jokes but the other day I got a
random person who posted on my wall, asking about New York and seeing if I'll be

22

there. So I guess it's connecting or a more public way of saying that I have friends .... but
I didn't wall back because it was an actual conversation so I privately messaged her
back." "Meg" considered this type of posting more suited for private messaging and
therefore responded by doing just that.
Birthday messages on users' walls are a more common form of posting mentioned
by many subjects. When a member signs into Facebook, a list of friend's birthdays
appears on the right hand side of the homepage. It usually lists whose birthday is on that
day and also whose birthdays are coming up. Since this information is readily available,

it encourages users to respond, generally by posting on the birthday person's wall.
"Johnny" explains, "I don't post that often now, I used to do it for people's birthdays but
now EVERYONE does it, it's not personal. I love that Facebook reminds you of people's
birthdays." To "Johnny," wall writing is a way to acknowledge someone's birthday, but
since it became a more common practice, the post has less value. Similarly, rarity of a
gift adds to its value. "Julie" would concur, "I once deleted a random girl's post on my
wall because she was the first to wish me a happy birthday-I didn't know her!" "Julie"
rejected this random girl's post because it held no value to her. Since they are not close,
"Julie" did not see a reason to initiate such an exchange, let alone respond. Rather than
create a bond between the two of them by leaving the post of and thereby creating the
necessity of a response, she preferred to reject the gesture by deleting it. Discovering
who writes on his wall amuses "Harry." "It's always interesting to see which random
people post on your birthday that you haven't talked to in a year." Random birthday
posting does not offend him; instead it intrigues him to see who views his birthday
worthy of acknowledgement. Likewise, "Harry" writes on people's walls on their

23

birthdays. In describing his behavior he says, "I do birthday posts, but I don't respond to
mine." Although "Harry" does not believe that he responds to the birthday posts on his
wall, his statement suggests otherwise. The posts that he receives in fact demand that he
reciprocate: by posting on other's walls on their birthdays. Essentially, "Harry" follows
Putnam's rule of generalized reciprocity, that "I'll do this for you now, without expecting
anything immediately in return and perhaps without even knowing you, confident that
down the road you or someone else will return the favor" (2000: 134). Birthday posting is
directly applicable to this rule. "Harry" writes birthday messages on people's walls
because they have for him in the past, or now will in the future. He does it because
birthday etiquette demands that if someone acknowledges his birthday, he is obligated to
acknowledge his or hers in return.
Wall posting therefore is a valuable part of maintaining social bonds on
Facebook. Writing jokes and witty banter is preferred over conversations starters.
"Sara" agrees, "It takes more time to say something clever, it means more." More
dangerous however, are the consequences of ignoring a wall post. It can result in
offending the giver, possibly to the point of ending the reciprocal relationship. These
consequences can carry out beyond Facebook into the physical community. Birthday
posting epitomizes this form of exchange. Recognition of a post by the recipient is
delayed; it occurs on the giver's birthday. The popularity of birthday wall messages
attests to the strength of this reciprocal relationship. Thus wall writing is a powerful form
of exchange on Facebook, cementing community bonds.

Conclusion

24

The media lauds technology as a surging tide bringing waves of change to our
lives. They tend to lump Facebook into that category. Facebook does change the face of
interactions but perhaps not in the way that they envision. Instead, institutions like
Facebook show that no matter how much technology may enhance our lives, human
behavior essentially does not change. Although humans create new technologies and
social forums, our cultural behaviors remain constant; they are just can-ied out over new
mediums. Facebook is successful not because of its monetary gains but because it
functions as a community.
Not only is Facebook a community, it also shares the same characteristics that
physical communities possess. In particular, the forms ofreciprocity and gift exchange
exhibited in physical communities manifests itself on Facebook as well. Therefore it
should come as no surprise that Facebook users demonstrate the same sort of actions as
the kula ring that Mauss observed. Communities are based on social bonds which in turn
are maintained through practices of reciprocity. Gift giving, poking and wall writing all
function as forms of exchange. These interactions show that reciprocity has more to do
with the underlying meanings and obligations than the actual objects. Thus, pixels and
words serve just as important of a social purpose on Facebook as the lending of a book to
a friend.
Gift giving, as a Facebook application, reveals that the virtual gesture of giving a
gift is what matters. Those who choose not to participate understand very well why they
do not receive gifts: because they do not give them. The giving of gifts falls into one of
two categories on Facebook. Gifts between romantic interests constitute the first type.
These, while not always reciprocated with another gift, are generally acknowledged

25

through some other form of communication. The second type of gift giving is that
between friends. These generally are more likely to be reciprocated with a gift in return.

In socially ambiguous situations, gifts are also utilized. By accepting an icon, the
recipient also becomes obligated to the giver, creating a social bond.
Bonds form through poking as well. When someone responds to a poke by
poking the giver back, it means that the gift is given again, rather than nullified. That
explains why although the subjects failed to articulate it, the reason that they could not
stop poking someone back was because obligation created by the poke would not allow
it. In essence, poking back means that the recipient gives the gesture again, continuing a
relationship of mutual dependence. Because poking serves as a mechanism for getting a
user's attention, it usually occurs between love interests or good friends. Romantically,
poking works as a way to flirt; while between good friends it becomes a habitual
relationship of mutual dependence or a way of joking by mock flirting. In this way,
poking creates relationships of intimacy.
Wall writing, the final form of exchange looked at in this study, contains many of
the same components as gift giving and poking. Like these other mechanisms of
exchange, reciprocity plays a key role in the posting of messages. Witty comments and
inside jokes are the preferred type of writing and ones that require a clever comeback.
Deleting or ignoring a post can offend the giver, damaging their relationship with the
recipient. Denying an offer, the message, is like refusing a gift which results in the
severing of bonds between the giver and receiver. Since wall writing is a public form of
communication, conversation type postings are looked down upon. Yet the perfect
example of wall exchanges occurs on birthdays. The birthday post demonstrates

26

reciprocity at its finest: people post on the birthday person's wall, and while the recipient
does not respond right away, they will post on others' walls when their birthdays come.
Reciprocity does not always mean giving something back right away but instead confers
an obligation for some sort of comparable response at some point. Hence, the popularity
of the birthday posts. The exchange of birthday messages constructs a link between the
two actors, shaping a social relationship.
Gift-giving, poking, and wall writing are all functions on Facebook with real
world counterparts. Exchange-whether it occurs through these virtual applications or by
giving a birthday card-has the same social obligations attached to it. Interestingly
enough, all three forms of exchange involve components of jokes in them. If this was to
be studied further, I would suggest looking into the purpose of jokes in social situations.
While most of the relationships affected by these exchanges already exist, they are
recognized and strengthened by these actions. While Facebook represents the next wave
of social interaction, the behaviors and actions of the users stays consistent with
preexisting behaviors and actions. Therefore, Facebook is a community and also is why
Facebook, as virtual society, functions just the same as a physical community. Whether
exchanging shells or pixels on a screen, gift-giving remains a cultural constant.

27

References Cited
Anderson, Benedict. 1991. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread
ofNationalism. London: Verso.
Barrett, Richard A. 1984. Culture and Conduct: An Excursion in Anthropology. Belmont:
Wadsworth, Inc.
Brown, Scott. 2008. How Facebook Exposed Us All as Freaks. Wired Magazine.
February.16.02.
Century, Douglas. 2002. Two of Rap's Hottest Return to the Dis.The New York Times. 6
January. <httn://auerv.nvtimes.com/e-st/ful lnal!e.htm l?res=9C07E7D9 I El0F91 ')A
1S7S2C0A9649C8R61> [cited 19 March 2008]
comScore. 2007. Major Social Networking Sites Substantially Expanded Their Global
Visitor Base during Past Year. comScore, Inc. 31 July.
<httn://www.comscore.com/nress/release.asn?nress=1 ')SS> [cited 7 May 2008]
Gee1tz, Clifford. Religion As a Cultural System.
Godbout, Jacques T. and Alain Caille. 1998. The World ofthe Gift. Trans. Donald
Winkler. Montreal &
Kingston, London and Ithaca: McGill-Queen's University Press.
Godelier, Maurice. 1999. The Enigma ofthe Gift. Trans. Nora Scott. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Facebook. 2008. <www farPhook rom>
Komter, Aafke E. 2005. Social Solidarity and the Gift. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Levi-Strauss, Claude. 1987[1950]. Jntroduction to the Work ofMarcel Mauss. Trans.
Felicity Baker. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Mauss, Marcel. 1967(1925]. The Gift: Forms and Functions ofExchange in Archaic
Societies. New York: W.W. Norton & Company, Inc.
Mead, Margaret. 1928. Coming ofAge in Samoa: A Psychological Study ofPrimitive
Youth for Western Civilisation. New York: William Morrow & Company.
Osteen, Mark. 2002. Introduction to The Question of the Gift: Essays Across Disciplines.
ed. Mark Osteen. London and New York: Routledge.
Putnam, Robert D. 2000. Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival ofAmerican

28

Community. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Seaford, Richard. 1994, Reciprocity and Ritual: Home and Tragedy in the Developing
City-State. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Vara, Vau Hini. 2008. Facebook CEO Seeks Help as Site Grows Up. Wall Street Journal.
5 March. <httn://online.wsi.com/article/SR 120465 1554192 10627.html> [cited 19
March 2008]

29

Figures

1• Welcome to Facebookl I Facebook - Windows Internet Explorer
00 • il!J ht1p,/t,,ww,raaboct.<0m/nlex,J7l>7

hnv1C1rd:

[v] ,, "' myspace

Facebook Is a social utility U1at connects you

facebook

,-.ith the people around you.

c:=J
Use facebook to ..•

S",gn up for facebook
lfs i Ha.'ld .lft')""Mt O l'\j:li\.

.b:l,

Kup U9 wth fri@llds arid tl!r#(

fi) Sfw t ohotos .ind \'ijt os

([j Cont.ol Pitney onln!.

.8. R!CDMect wth o\l d m rnatt;
9r1id.J,:

find your f rie:nds on fa c::d>ook

--:g

1,,~m•,·~ ,
01

~:.~~~.:J~-.
~:.~-:.;/;;;:~~{i..-..
••.: flta.•,· '-c' .

U. the ffll!nd ~ •

·-"""

Done

Figure 1: The login page for Facebook (www.facehook.com).

r•

Facebook

I

fv

- Wi_ndows Inte rnet Explorer

.,. t!:__htl)://wWW,f.x:Ebod(.cOl'fVt:)rofll&.,:tp7kf=6103l68tof=nf
f.118 Edrt 'bsVf

Fa'l'O"i'!Ps Iool3

t:te~

1,'i

vl.. ~

Co 'l!k- C •

vj co .. S-

AOlY

o• •

Top5tories

CI -

* """""""'• ~ 71bkxbd

.. t 1) lf""1IDII ..

...

··-Ft~

(i9 <.m,es •

ol

~

':> OH>•

._,

Edual.Jcnlrofo

j:!l ~ ifl J.L r;; ~
., »vt..lf-..h
t ,1~-an ~

Caplur~ eve1y

C•m• r• Phone

:i-t'! U

.....,.,. ....

-0-r;i.!-,,y;t,o' ':"!19

~

nwmenl wllhJ
FREE

} s et11,g,.

f l ~ltrla

""'

Online Eltchulve

C:.. Aa.R.to

....._

A t /)

;-:h

~

•

(!ul-1

..... .....
,..,,,,.,
~

Spo,ts

\IW!d.H<•

,,--c.... ,;-

·-

' '""' " .... ...... ......u
Offll .... t

...... ~

-

, _ _ _ .._

- #-

Figure 2: Example of a user's profile (www.facehook.com).

30

"'"""'

i"' Facebook

0

•

I Search - Windows Internet Explorer

~ hl\>://www.-.co""'.rq,1q=/n•brlrod!lhitrq

EIB E<fl't y_ow FiY17- Iools t:teP

~.l-· l~ c•1• Tn,5'orb . w ~ . 6.1., Gt.,rio, .
..;J ao , ..... D .... 0 ew:man:,... ~ 71hkvi:M ~ ~

AOL~ 1, "-'
c,, ,.sk- ~ -·

~

i!o:, Spol'ts- • "-AOI.Raiio

•

0 ~

..

Q ~.
"\ Sotti'lgi•

~ Serdkl•

\Altirk...

l} • (J

Faceh::dl:I~

iiii-1 '
~lion,

~

• · '- e:aga...

TQOh •

1;,m:11 ..........

a...

~-, ~~

.u "' .
IT!] £ - .,

1,3

..-

Cutl!ll~~l
LI. .-""'

Sl.rt6e'3.:f~H..lr.f6CO.Ol,9"e.ltde»-1

C

"""'

Figure 3: Example of how to friend someone on Facebook (www.facehook com).
[-" Facebook

(JO • ~

I Gift Shop - Windows Internet Exf!orer

hlq>://www,f~.con,/glfWlop.rq>lr~

fll9 ~it ~.18W

Fi'oQ"lt&s Ioob

I,~
Co ,s:, 1c..

l:laP

1.:'.J-l!'lo•I &r"'""'" • ID""°""'

AOI. I--

H eo .. ~ 8 •

•

(ill..,.. • .;; ,,,,,. • t:.l AOt ....

bbded ~- <hrl. "...,.._.,. .

_

0 -

• Q-

•

()setthJs•

~ -.,.

:J7
~ • t) "l' • c' fage •
t:_::~;::;~~~~~~~~~:====:~;-;:;:;~~=c,:3 :---::=====--

• ~331• , WtltbWSlh'II
Norton-

* """'"""'•· ~ n

fCl- ~ I-Faecao..

r.if""""l

Choose your gift:

~.uffl

~--- ~D
-•
Appk..UoM

Cl),..,,.

T"'b •
OpUMs •

The Toiet Seat gift ls FR££. Sponsore.d by wtutH.ippens in VegB-

ech

•'t~·11'..
~ ~

LL ""-

IEI,.,_
11:1-

St

Sort I lelbod:

.......
-..-.

• eut:n:ang

-""'

---_..

lle.m,:-, lten;

"

"

'ti!! , L

0 --..~ 41~
"
"

JJI

Al.I.~

,..,...

""°"

'

l?.:..1) 4"

.!.,2 l -4 S Hni lasc

Ch00$C your

recipient:

- - - - - - - - -,...
~ ,-,- - - - 0 ..!_· ~
,.. • ....,,oa:
•, tM'K •

Figure 4: The Facebook Gift Shop where gifts are selected and purchased
(www.facehook.com ).

31

I~ Facebook I
• ,fL http:/1",ww.fam::w:d:.comJglb.Pl)7k:t=H09EO

E1b tdit YJtrw F~t!B& I ool-i ~ '3
M>t.. V

jft

~71-

• 0JGa-res .. ".o Si:iortS • .-: AOLRado

~ . !t"l o ...- 9 r119storiei ... W ~

•!Go .,., C •

C-. 0<1k C •

.. ..... •1r1

0

Booknwks•

Wrdowslh'e

P ·

~ a- • , ........, •

) Settrq,•

f.} .. □

- ·

►e_ac.,, •

TllOb •

!iiJ ,p

Horl o Jf"

0-fJs~:s ~~"-'

tQp,ry H:)!~.fff'I rTl'f k-\"f- (, do,•)t QO ~ I.

iuo-hc:ni,~•.li-:t!O"l

~..-,p 1t.~) d.:t•! Ni':y ,cl W"g we i3 :ic,:a

'"fO'.''tf"fi!)p.!:rt"o.,.
SC'0.6rQ.K-!SO"lf,

} 1 )'OIJ ••

Omo

Figure 5: Examples of gifts posted on a user's wall (www.facehook.com).
[@

0

Facebook

•

I Home -

Windows l~ernet Explorer

I!, http ://wWW,,-,CO,t\mrre.ir,,

t:te"
--

f !E Edit YJaw Fj'terltl>i Ioob
M)L V

/

1

Co ,il< C ·

-

;i

Y i..

•JGo

JnmtnJ • fi!,i 6-nes • ,T"~ spo,ts • W ACt.Rno <t, ~

P') o• 9 Topst«b

11 0 •

0

Bod<mirls• ~ 71blod<ed

r Faaticd< I tt>rne

4i I~""' .. .. Whdows-Uve

.

~ a- • , ....._.., •

FBI Ratnspcd:dcou-s...

• Q~

•

l,t Smdm•

( ) 5ettrq,•

li MySpacB

'-} • I,)

"!'J ...

,. e_age •

Norton"

IJ

r"'

-·
TQOI$ •

1.t~ml"'llffl lff'f"r~d inan■llum.

e,u,t

Awfiar,Lion.1

,,,._

_ ,......

!l e,~

·-

t!'l
8 - ...,,

l loth:,tioM

l OGt:.:in:~tul

(OJ

nrepo,:.e,iby;

~

i:a-ti..:l l - " ' -

Mot~ ~t lk.c.ani

!u1t»t5cn'191h,s

~

t ~,gu:dt.c•

,;,Jd,hd l,....1'

tB.11

,;l-~

-·

l,S. ~

cat<

,:;-=-==,

[-~rJ\t!

,;i-~

-----

_ _ _ _-,,----'
, . "1'6mot

_ _ , +, 100'9

Figure 6: The Facebook homepage, the screen that opens after logging in. On the left
hand side is where the user can see who poked (www.facehook .com).

32

~ f acebo_
~_l~__J

0

~ •

• • Windows Internet Explorer

I' h!l>:/,w,,w.-

.con>\lf•file.it.,?ida6096<7

89 Edit Y..~ FiFCf'"ltes Iooh 1:iaP
M>C.1,.-

"'J .j~o.,.1 .

!!__

•)<» " ;;", ~ •

Co 111< C •
...

Norton'

I ~ .. ,

Wnbwslt.-e

.. ~ Gtmes .. ~ ~ l s • IC.:: A«Ro,

TQP~ .. [!J ~

*

Boa<miru• ,\:l,7lblrled

't Oied< •

0, M.,pQ.Jest;

•

. ,_.

Q Shocph,;i •

t..s,nh>•

\ Auld.Tri< •

1.; · r.J

~, Faceto:t I

""l \fl
m
~
M•lrit
'-'!irTI 11:lll:lJ;n rC• -i../
roJiY.Jhfc y,,e,i;• ~pcs,c,, IO«oeot~ n1, ltwo.Jd
bt y.». ••

AJ1 : , , - . ~1; n c ~ ~
-..,

rt'

..,..

:-,'ilr.l,'I

"·..._.>

,.,._ u\•,.,< . ,•,...,c,rc..--,-_.,~. · C....

l u s babv • t i s ~tt .-ld i-S'3~

ffb-~

t-.~ :r<Q'

w.estlt,c.tiwu , Ntfwv,i

• rfllllllllllMOllllin~
J ~,,..,th t.\,t ...... ( ,W..h
u ,rr, ( 44])
t , , ,u (~J}
~ f (113J)

- cs-0

:r-11 ( +½)
'Jl.ulph.J, " ( .M)
';l,iYa"f
(21)

_,..
,
.
a

a: U>4lu ,c:,.,N• t tm.D;t

d),..,.

cl1J.t.= 01>lvd! U"'t,,. l ~

C• -.ob JQ • tOC:W:~
).#'klr). ~ ;,-. : ; o , ~I
\,.-.~

(ffi}

-=

1~ ~ :••Mclo: :~ ''.~ «d1

. . r""

h !Oltcnhs.- (t ll t

' • •C.-

. ., . . . . . .Oowwn4\ ... N:,.

Doro

Figure 7: Examples of wall posts on a user's wall (www.facehook.com).

33

Jllt' •

'- eago •

Toots •

