Anthropology Senior Theses

University of Pennsylvania

ScholarlyCommons
Department of Anthropology

Spring 2008

Youth Sexual Agency in Nairobu: at the Nexus of Three Ideological
Practices
Zohra Ahmed
University of Pennsylvania

Follow this and additional works at: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses

Q

Part of the Anthropology Commons

Recommended Citation
Ahmed, Zohra, "Youth Sexual Agency in Nairobu: at the Nexus of Three Ideological Practices" (2008).
Anthropology Senior Theses. Paper 96.

This paper is posted at ScholarlyCommons. https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/96
For more information, please contact repository@pobox.upenn.edu.

Youth Sexual Agency in Nairobu: at the Nexus of Three Ideological Practices
Disciplines
Anthropology

This thesis or dissertation is available at ScholarlyCommons: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/96

YOUTH SEXUAL AGENCY IN NAIROBI: AT THE NEXUS OF THREE
IDEOLOGICAL PRACTICES
By
Zahra Ahmed
In
Anthropology
Submitted to the
Department of Anthropology
University of Pennsylvania
Thesis Advisor: Ritty Lukose
2008

Abstract:
Based on qualitative ethnographic fieldwork, I compare the
approaches to prevention employed to actively regulate the sexual
lives of youth at school, at home and by global health
institutions. This research began as an attempt to overcome the
challenges of implementing a Behavior Change Communication (BCC)
HIV prevention class, Global Health Industry' s orthodox model. I
tried to tailor the BCC model by focusing on local prevention
schemes and studying the larger cultural, economic, political and
historical context to show how home and school environments shaped
youth sexual behaviors and attitudes. I discovered that not only
do the school and the homes manage the youth' s sexual agency in
distinct ways, their shared moralistic overtones determining the
youth' s sexual agency, proved effective, despite Global Health' s
position otherwise. Also significant was that the youth' s
identities are heavily influenced by the myriad demands placed by
stakeholders, which in turn are in rooted in the ideologies
associated with their particular social functions. Finally, I
noted a deficiency in the intervention literature on BCC' s
application in such environments; these assume that "local"
efforts are homogeneous whereas the reality is very different and
they gloss over differences as merely "cultural", whereas native
stakeholders are stratified by the power they exercise, and the
degree of access they have to the young people. My research
suggested that a more nuanced approach was required to gain a
measure of success. We must investigate into which prevention
methods and environments best suit the youth, and how we might
assist them in the triage of available prevention schemes.

Guided by Critique
For over twenty years, HIV has summoned the world' s
attention, in tragically poignant and discontinuous ways. The
acronym not only designates a retrovirus' attachment to immune
cells, but an entire medley of images, facts and social agitation
invoked in its name. The disease' s imprint on social reality has
transfigured this microbe into a living myth. The full name, the
human immunodeficiency virus, contracted into its acronym has come
to designate the original biophysical label but also envelopes
varied and shifting responses to the degradation of human
bodies(i).Accruing currency as it 1s reiterated, the reasons for
its deployment become normalized. Now, only loosely intimating its
specific meaning, upon each utterance, the myth sequesters from a
nebulous collection of embedded representations, the author' s
strategic intention for communication (Barthes, 1957; 225).
Deployed across the networks global communication, the Global
Health Industry diffuses its myth, surfacing from the voluble
cause it has rallied promoting HIV' s prevention. The
signification it has endowed , framing the disease' s reality
inches towards securing hegemonic consent. Comprised of
transnational humanitarian, non-governmental organizations and
supranational agencies, the Global Health Industry maneuvers a
biopolitical power, as Foucault foresaw, which regulates social
life from its biological and corporal interior, sealing its
complicity with the new world order in which "[ ... ]what 1s
directly at stake··· is the production and reproduction of life
itself" (Hardt & Negri, 2000; 24). In promoting its ethical,
"just war" to attend to basic needs and to guarantee human
rights, Global Health pronounces its legitimated force by crafting

deterritorialized, decontextualized plans for intervention,
promulgating its actions through the structures of global
governance and communication which have ushered from unequal
processes of globalization(Hardt &Negri, 2000; 21).
Global Health' s exertion of biopower emanates from a state
of political disappointment and emotional tragedy, "opening up"
111 Simon Critchley' swords,
"the question of justice, which
brings up the question of ethics of the Good" (Critchley, 2007).
The ethical subject, for Critchley defines her matrix of ethics by
an infinite of demands she approves. Our ethical obligation to
HIV' s prevention stems from an emboldened emotion which catalyzes
political action. The resulting myth, shared by Global Health
Industry' s discourse conflates any objective epidemiological
statements with this subjective, emotionally propelled imperative.
What has veritably taken hold is myth of HIV AIDS as a moral
panic. Through the media in particular, Global Health promotes its
agenda by simulating the cruelty of the HIV AIDS pandemic, where
in fact neither the virus nor its most hospitable accomodation,
unequal distributions of capital, work by fulfilling its
obligations to human welfare (Baudrillard, 1988; 170). Even the
reifying construction of a distinctly· "African sexuality"
quickly abandoned by Global Health orthodoxy, works as a
simulacrum of epidemiological knowledge (Caldwell, 1989). This
moral panic premises the ideology which reproduces the Global
Heal th Industry' s legitimacy.
Its decontextualized and deterritorialized solution
stipulates a highly concentrated vigilance effort, mapping the
bastion of suffering 111 sub-Saharan Africa, and has judged
preventive education as a long-term solution to containing

infection. By surrendering contextual specificity and complexities
of the real in the name of human rights and universalized human
desires, Global health policy, formally housed· under the auspices
of International Development, universalizes a trajectory towards
health promotion, sexual responsibility and empowerment which
builds from the individual. up. The "hegemonic problematic of
'development' " is carried out at the level of supranational
decrees and non-governmental organizations, in spite of the
structural, political determinacy of the 'Third-world' s' poverty.
Remarking on his ethnography of non-governmental agricultural
reform intervention in Lesotho, James Ferguson' s precisely
designates the "anti-politics machine" to clarify the
shortcomings of the development project, as the "[···] principal
means through which the question of poverty is de-politicized in
the world today" (Ferguson, 1990; 256).
Although one' s sexuality is not exclusively conditioned by
class position and political participation, mitigating Ferguson' s
critique of de-politicization, the Global Health Industry is still
fastened to its position as expert and hegemon, prograrmned to
issue orientalist discourses and to help pattern a more stratified
world order, regardless of many of its projects' altruistic
motivations.
Particularly as it relates to the countries on the Africa
continent, Ferguson posits a double shadow to take into account
the way the entire African continent and its social reality
receives the proliferation of development discourse. He describe
the current situation in which "alongside the official economy,
the 'shadow economy' is an 'informal' one that is 'parallel
to it" (Ferguson, 16; 2006). As such, there is an imposed,
globally legitimate order which sets the stage for potential

development, which obscures one which is that of the "noble
savage" , traditionalist, tribally arranged and anachronistic.
"[···] [I]n all of these figurations, the first version is the
'official' , and implicitly Western model, while its uncanny dark
double is the 'African' version thereof" (Ferguson, 16; 2006).
The doubled shadow cast upon the continent recalls Baudrillard' s
conception of the hyperreal, whereby, (Baudrillard, 1988; 166)
Simulation is no longer that of a territory, a referential
being or a substance. It is the generation by models of a real
without origin or reality: a hyperreal. The territory no longer
precedes the map, nor survives it. Henceforth, it is the map that
precedes the territory - precession of simulacra - it is the map
that engenders the territory ...
The Western model serves only as standard of relationality 1n
the world order, since, even (Ferguson, 23; 2006),
[with] an aspiration to membership and inclusion 1.n the
world, the repeated nomination of 'Africa' replaces real
relations of inequality with formal equity. Thus, any discussion
of African experience through globalization must be premised an
initial one on the social relations of membership, responsibility
and inequality on a planetary scale.
Side by side these elisions and simulacra interwoven as self
serving ideological strategies to the Global Health Industry,
there is a professed interest to synthesize global health policies
with local schemes of health promotion. Such pursuits which aim to
bridge universalist conceptualizations with culturally relative
modes disease prevention produce some fundamental ethical
breaches. Notably, local knowledge and practices are only relevant
to the extent that they service the Industry' s aims (ii).

Effectively, Global Health' s incorporation of local concerns for
health may only re-ffirm its hegemony, taking cue from Laclau and
Mouffe' s reevaluaton of the Gramscian term where the procurement
of consent by the totalizing but diffuse power is dynamically
creative (Laclau & Mouffe, 1985).
Stepping outside of Global Health Industry' s myth of HIV
AIDS, and more broadly beyond the development industry' s typified
forms of knowledge, political technologies and social relations,
there 1s a gapping void in our understanding of the manipulation
of biopower from an exclusively local viewpoint, on par with the
level of sophistication we are afforded into its deployment on a
global scale. An awareness of the Industry' s myopic scope, and
hegemonic imperatives, goaded exploration into the qualia and
practice of everyday life as it relates to how the concern of
human life, in the face of HIV AIDS, enfolds in the localized
hearth of risk- Sub-Saharan Africa. It is hoped that an evidence
informed conception of the moral panic' s epicenter can guide us
closer to matrix of demands subsuming our ethical response.
Furthermore, with this insight, we hope to reverse the one sided
interest maintained by the Health Industry by elucidating the
frictions global health policy occasions to the advancement of
local agendas. This ethnography will retrace the myth of HIV, 111
the distant contexts which inspire the decontextualized global
heal th policies, as it is deployed, internalized, and
rearticulated in the regulation of human life, so as to provide a
common unit of measure to qualify the global-local contrasted
approaches to reduce risk.

Ethnographic Case Study

In Kenya, the greatest increase in infection occurs in urban
areas, most affecting female youth, followed by their male
counterparts (wwww.unaids.org, 2007). Nairobi contains an
expanding network of national, non-governmental, faith-based and
c01m11unity initiatives tackling the preponderate vulnerability
falling on its urban youth. This ethnography hones in on one youth
population from a Nairobi c01rununity, serving as a sample from
which we hope to induct an explanation for the persistence of
infection across this demographic. Inasmuch as youth risk
reduction essays mostly take form as some type of prevention
education, this case study characterizes the access to strategies
and information regarding prevention, as well to sexual health
knowledge, treating it as one of the infinite factors conducing
the agent' s risk.
Specifically, the ethnography analyses the manufacture and
consumption of nuanced myths of HIV, made available to a group of
youth in three distinct socio-geographic spaces- the Cheleta
Primary School, their homes in an urban slum called Githogoro, and
the elite gated community they pass to get from one to the other
called Runda Estate. Each space represents by metonymy the
distinct authorities making prevention messages availablerespectively the State, parental culture and the Global Health and
Development Industry. The differentiations proposed in this
ethnography enfold from the original premises for conducting field
work in this school c01m11unity site of Nairobi. Initially, the
difficulties faced when implementing a Behavior Change
Co1m11unication (BCC) modeled HIV prevention class in Cheleta' s
setting need to be explained. After a deep analysis of how, 111
their clay to clay, these young students are engaged with the topics
surrounding HIV AIDS. As this ethnography contends, this

experience encapsulated the frictions between global, national
local ideologies of health promotion.

METONYMY
Theoretical Framework
We discern from the physical disposition of the land,
ideological territories where different set of demands are placed
on these youth. Each space behaves metonymically for the three
entities regulating HIV prevention in this youth community.
Despite some overlap in their strategies for prevention, the
socio- geographic spaces maintain clearly contrasted relations
between the youth and those officiating prevention. Further, at
school and at home, the configurations between youth and authority
modulate peer interactions and self expression suited to their
complementary contexts, but fundamentally opposed the Global
Health Industry' s communication of youth culture. By
reconstructing the crux of ideology and the active modalities of
power, from the practices effectuating prevention and regulating
the body, we try to put in view the ideoscapes (Appadurai)erected
around the lives of the youth in question. Subsequently, we will
evaluate the ramifications on youth these control mechanisms
trigger according to the theoretical demands of prevention, and
student preferences.
In essence, we want to understand the entire manufacturing
process of prevention strategies from their packaging to delivery
and the subsequent behaviors and demands they incur in the youth.
Implicitly, the challenge we are trying to take is one of
anthropological divination: by recreating the structures which the

youth internalize in their practices, can we get any closer tci
situate the spontaneous event, in other words the sexual act?
Without a doubt, society has an evident interest in securing
the health of its members. However, what being healthy concretely
denotes can be contested according to one' s worldview. For this
reason, we are using the myth as our unit of analysis since it
poses how and why we speak about HIV the way that we do; indeed,
both of these answers hint towards our personal conceptualization
of health, disease and perceived degree of agency we exercise over
each.
Marxist articulations of ideology push the seed of
investigation deeper, by correlating each author' s motivations
and implied meta-narrative, when issuing prevention, packaging a
mythology of HIV AIDS, or conditioning sexual agency, with the
reproduction of their authority. Ultimately, the logic behind any
ideology distills to the reproduction of the means of production,
under which the author has an assignee! role. Following, the
intentions of authorship unmistakably permeate its final products,
so that prevention messages re-iterated by the youth will validate
the positions of authority currently enjoyed by the stakeholder 111
question. Insipiently, the knowledge power nexus cannot be
disaggregated.
To be clear on the mechanism of ideology, it begins its magic
when it "interpellates" the individual as a social subject.
Althusser borrowing from Lacanian psychoanalysis, portends that
the individual identifies with ideal Subject entirely
ideologically construed, 111 the same way the child during the
mirror stage, becomes consc1ous of her integrated subjectivity,
when she sees herself as an object 111 the nnrror. Interpellatecl by

the ideology' s archetypal Subject, her indoctrination normalizes
the imagined relations believing to entertain with society, which
forms the crux of ideology (Althusser, 19716; 165). Although
ideology is the total reconstructon of one' s worldview, social
purpose, and self-recognition, "ideology has a material
existence" (Althusser, 1971b; 165). By materiality, he has 1n
mind both our corporality and our real relations to the means of
production. The body works as ideology' s instrument: it
coordinates our gestures, dispositions and our everyday practice.
Although we take definite distance from the classical Marxist
avowal to the primacy of the economic base, from which even
Al thusser had stepped back, the ideological position is anchored
into material determinations, but functions autonomously,
extending its impact onto the the economic base or superstructural
tiers.
Whether through spatially bound ideological apparatuses,
characteristic of disciplinary societies or by the new world
order' s decentralized, "biopolitical lattice work", the
youth' s stakeholder authorities equip them with the strategies
for their habitus (Hardt & Negri, 2000; 41). Exposed to the play
of power, the habi tus is incorporated as (Bourdieu, 72; 1977).

[" •J systems of durable, transposable dispositions,
structured structures predisposed to function as structuring
structures .. ·structuring of practices and representations
objectively 'regulated' and 'regular' without in any way being
the product of obedience to rules.
Interpellated by the means of social reproduction, reoriented
around the dox~ or predisposed to a set of corporal strategies all these procedures prompt self-recognition. The personhood

produced in the process has been subjected to control, but is also
the subject of their desire. This paradoxical phenomenon which
Judi th Butler named subjectivati on (assujetissement) obscures the
very categories we use to talk about the bounds of the subject' s
grasp, or "[t]he very processes and conditions that secure a
subject' s subordination are also the means by which she becomes a
self-conscious identity and agent" (Butler 1997b in Mahmood,
2001, 210).
Hence, the series of demands, attitudes and practices
mediating the youth' s interactions with their stakeholders sets
the terms for the realm of possibilities. Whereas Global Ilealth
assumes that "local" efforts are homogeneous the reality is very
different- they gloss over differences as merely "cultural",
whereas native stakeholders are stratified by the power they
exercise, and the degree of access they have to the young people.
As for the youth, they are complexly situated at the nexus of
these mechanisms of control and animation.
Within this same dual process of subordination and
activation, their sexual agency carves itself out. As Butler
expresses "[a]lthough this constitutive constraint does not
foreclose the possibility of agency, it does locate agency as a
reiterative or rearticulatory practice, immanent to power, and not
a relation o:f external opposition to power (Butler, 1993;15).
To be specific to the case in point, their risk :for HIV
AIDS further delimits their sphere of sexuality, assuming they do
not wish to contract HIV, which they may reclaim if they leverage
their stock of prevention capital- which we can understand to be
accumulated strategic experiences, knowledge, introspection- in
accordance to their position in social networks. Hermeneutically,

even with the risk for disease as our gage for agentive capacity,
the ideological practices which are intended to affect the
youth' s defense against HIV are impossible to objectively rank 1n
accordance to which affords a more expansive field of action.
Agency itself is ideologically premised and contextually inscribed
by the powers a play. As will be made apparent 111 the ideological
compartmentalization of space, given the range of stakeholders and
the specificity to their understanding of agency, which standards
do we apply to determine the fundamental ingredients for an
ethical and effective HIV prevention scheme for youth?
Space in Power
The physical layout of the ethnographic field site dates to
Kenyas colonial history, definitely established by the Germans 111
1885, followed by the British East Africa Company in 1888. The
vestiges of colonial sovereignty have been incorporated by the
order of powers structuring the independent nation. As Frantz
Fanon has commented, the colonial compartmentalization of space
set up spatial boundaries to reify colonial stratification. These
territories operated on the premise of reciprocal exclusivity,
which Fanon caricatures (Fanon, 1991; 39)
The town belonging to the colonized people ···1s a place of
i 11 fame, peopled by men of evi 1 repute. They are born there, it
matters little where or how; they die there, it matters not where,
nor how. It is a world without spaciousness; men live there on top
of each other. The native town is a hungry town, starved of bread,
of meat, of shoes, of coal, of light. The native town is a
crouching village, a town on its knees.
As Achille Mbembe elaborates, the topographic layout was an
exercise of sovereignty, categorizing who is dispensable and who

1s essential (Mbembe, 2003; 26). Borrowing from Eyal Weizmn' s
work, Mbembe coins "vertical sovereignty" in order to speak to
the topographic manifestations of biopower, "colonial occupation
is also dictated by the very nature of the terrain and its
topographical variations (hilltops and valleys, mountains and
bodies of water)" (Mbembe, 2003; 27).
Cheleta situated in the opening valley of the forest,
Githogoro' s houses form the pockets of lands enclosed by the
amoebic periphery of the Runda Estate- all together the fieldsite
maps a trajectory of power dynamics which this ethnography
distills in the cultural politics of HIV prevention.
The majority students of Cheleta Primary school come from two
neighboring slum villages Githogoro and Ruma surrounding Runda
estate, a gated cornmuni ty for expatriates, high profile Kenyans
and diplomats. Githogoro is the more populated of the two, with
permanent steel housing and a main alley lined with commercial
activities and bars. Ruma on the other hand is a newer suburban
slum in the valley of the Karura forest, an inexhaustible source
for firewood and privacy, otherwise unattainable in the village' s
close quarters. This land held by the Kikuyu was exploited by the
English' s coffee growing enterprise in the early 20'" century.
International competition and urban expansion pushed coffee
estates further north. In the 1970' s, the lands were partitioned,
most developed into residential estate, with its margins and
pockets of land left for temporary housing and non constructed
aluminum shacks. Recently, the encircling Karura forest was
restored by Nobel peace prince winner Wangari Muta Maathai.
Through the replacement of plantations with palatial households,
some residents of Githogoro are employed in informal retail,
domestic service, security, casual carpentry and construction.

High unemployment rates and burdensome rents force most families
to send their children to the free public schools. Its peripheral
location to the city and relative security has absorbed waves of
rural exodus, integrating Kikuyus, with Luos, Boranas, Kikambas
along with the many other linguistic groups of Kenya.
From the narrow and winding mud paths in Githogoro, on to the
crowded thoroughfare, pass the rusted barrier and on to a road
lined by manicured bushes, the students of Cheleta have arrived 1n
Runda. A short walk leads them to the gate of their school, which
inm1ecliately gives on to a few acres of uneven terrain. To th~
left, a series of single storey rectangular buildings enclose two
open air courtyards. The courtyards craddle the equatorial
sunrays, which creep into the classrooms through the perforations
of its rottirig doors.
At first glance, these places juxtaposed flag the types of
inequalities defining Kenyan society. In Runda, live the local
elite and foreign professionals engaged in the international
development project. The genealogy of the power commanded in this
space begins with enterprising colonial settlers. Now, the houses
on the fertile land enclose another rung of domination,
intricately implicated in its predecessor. The State and the slum
where reside the majority of Kenyan urbanites appear to control
dearth of resources, technology and luxury in comparison.
In fact, these material inequities instantiate the
distribution of power in urban Kenyan society. Githogoro, where
most of the Cheleta students live delimits the space of their
household culture, class position, and urban civil society. In
contrast Runda acts as the trope for the youths' alterity; the
growing mzungu (white person) presence parallels the

intensification of globalization. The local elite achieved their
status only through integrating themselves in these globalizing
processes, from successes under colonial rule through educati.on,
civil service or indirect rule, all the way to entering the global
market. Cheleta Primary School, upholds the State' s presence-- Lhe
youth' sonly contact with the formal sector. The school
coordinates most of their peer socialization, as well as the
division of labor through the certification of skills. The elite,
popular civil society and the State carve out such different
spaces because of their distinct social functions, and stratified
relationship to the means of production- hence, the sharp
disparities in wealth characterizing each locus.

METHODOLOGY
I first visi tee! Kenya in the summer of 2005. On a walk in the
vicinity of my hosts' house, I stumbled upon the Cheleta Primary
School. The next day, I started my first day teaching studentssome of whom were no more than a year younger than I was at the
time. After three months of teaching, I had to leave but with
plans to go back the following summer. My plan was to create HIV
prevention class because there was no such program, nor any kine!
of extracurricular activity. I structured it according to the
curricular outlines provided by UNAIDS for local health education
initiatives .. Before I started teaching, I went to visit some of my
students' families to get a sense of what would be appropriate to
talk about in this open forum. Gradually, my presence became known
in Githogoro as the foreigner living in one of the big houses who
teaches at Cheleta. The interviews I conducted with students,
teachers and parents to evaluate the HIV prevention class in
combination with my experiences teaching formally in the classroom

and facilitating the health education class formed the initial
basis of research. Over the course of the summer of 2007, I
conducted 60 more interviews with students, parents, residents of
Githogoro, the head of City Council schools, the Director of
Kenya' s National AIDS Control Council, journalists from the
Kenya' s Daily Nation newspaper and peer educators in youth
centers around Nairobi. In sum, this research represents nine
months of research over three consecutive summers mostly based on
qualitative research including 70 formal interviews, ten student
focus groups, and countless other informal conversations. Most of
my interview transcripts detail my informants' everyday life,
sexual. history, relationship to parents, and how they take into
consideration the risk of HIV.
The focus of analysis and its analogous methodological
approach, argued to fill the voids in HIVAIDS social scientific
scholarship signals two hermeneutic shifts: first, away from
merely seeing the disease in isolation, HIVAIDS is reclassified as
a social problem, requiring social and qualitative analysis
(Parker, 2000; 39-55). Tbe distinctly socialized character of the
virus ensures that while "anecdotal evidence may be less
conclusive··· it is sometimes a long way ahead of 'scientific'
evidence that moves politicians, donors and multilateral
organizations. Experience with AIDS··· leads us to think that time
lag between significant anecdote and quantitative 'evidence' may
be as long as 20 years" (Barnett and Whiteside; 2003). It is
hoped that collaboration between applied anthropology and global
health policy can generate ethnographic questions about the nature
of the epidemic and people' s responses to it, in order to craft
ethnographically informed health interventions (Heald, 2003: 220;
Parker, 204: 2003).Second, departing from an impression of health

promotion which purportedly and exclusively attends to efficacious
risk reduction, here, the investigative approach adopted considers
how the mythologies of HIVAIDS plug into the varied agenda of
larger knowledge-power structures (Foucault). Paying attention to
how instruments of power interact with the management of HIV' s
brings the scope of our assessments -into the globally targeted
local contexts, up to speed with the current social theory.
For the specific purposes of this ethnography, to fully
exploit the analytic fruits of a Marxist inspired conception of
ideology, the context of dissemination, mode of dissemination
chosen, its potential performance and its explicit substance work
is furnished to reenact the materiality of interpellation. To this
end, the use of qualitative methods preserve the multiple
potential occasions within the assorted discursive formations for
the topic of HIV AIDS to be mentioned. As for the reliance on
interviews, they are treated instances of social communication,
rather than "solipsistic confession" which provide an example of
metacotmmmication conveying description, analysis, and
significance of the acts and processes of communication (Briggs,
2; 1986).

While ethnographic evidence can serve to highlight how social
reality propels disease, there are a few considerations which
could undermine the authenticity of my informants' responses.
First, since I was a teacher in the classroom, I did hold a
position of authority which seemed to be dismantled once I
interacted with the students outside of the classroom because the
proximity of our ages. Still, the power imbalance indubitably
tainted to some degree or another the youth' s candor. The school
was also my point of entry into my research, and so comprises a
more complete qualitative insight into the ideology of health,

sexuality and youth. Second, due to the sensitive topic students
and my other informants had an incentive lie to me to keep their
privacy. Third, I was a Pakistani female with a strong American
accent. My otherness interfered in my ability to conduct
interviews because I interviewed a self selecting group of
students and Githogoro residents open to a female foreigner asking
questions about sexuality, and in English no less. Finally, the
reader should be aware that what I recorded reflects a jointly
produced construction of "what is out there" (Briggs, 3; 1986).
For example, when asking about whether my interlocutor actively
worried about HIV, I inherently presuppose and then perhaps draw
out a concern.
Awa.re of the epistemological underpinnings of my data, we
procc!cd into the School and Gi thogoro axis, each time using
Runcla' s Global Health assumptions and model as the social
space' s constructive foil.

SCHOOL
Relying on analysis of discourse and performance, it is
evident that the school enforces a view of sexual agency which 1s
diametrically opposed to the Global Heal th industry' s, as
underlined in its mandates for preventive education. If we were to
espouse the orthodox prevention ideology in global health today,
then we would abolish the school' s current pedagogic practices,
and mode of peer socializations; most households would be
criticized for preserving a "taboo" around, or bashful distance
with young person' s sexuality and HIV/AIDS. As a remedy, Global
Health appeals to creating formal arrangement for health
education, importing dialogic and introspective curricular models

with a holistic scope , exemplified by the Behavior Change
Communication Model (wwww.psi.org, 08/01/2007,
http: //www. psi. org/ our_programs/products/bcc. html). Global heal th
and the Development Industries draw their shared philosophical
stance on education from Brazillian theorist Paulo Freiere' s work
on progressive pedagogy. Essentially, for the marginalized agent
to overcome the unremitting forces of structural. violence,
manifested as poverty, disease,or persecution, she must undergo a
process of demystification allowing her to recognize the sources
of her oppression. It is critical consciousness, as Friere
designated, which renders transparent the agent' s social reality(
Feiere, 1993). For critical consciousness to be cultivated:
student-teacher relations are equalized, introspection rep] aces
memorization, and knowledge is generated by consensus (Campboll &
Foulis ; 2002). Under Frierian inspired parLicipatory prevention
practices, classrooms are led by peer educators in which rolevant
community concerns are discussed in an organic, judgment free
environment (Campbell& ot al; 2002). Tho learning space created
along these lines catalyzes honest and engaged discussion on
prevailing norms, attitudes and behaviors, with the intention of
evaluating their costs, benefits in the short and long term, for
the individual' s health and for the community' s strength. The
self confidence required to act upon the personal and group
resolutions made after such dialogic negotiations, grows as the
students recognize their capacity to be an agent of change, and
seize the occasion to do so. Moreover, receiving other persons'
support and the allure of tangible incentives along the way
sustains momentum. As Catherine Campbell has remarked in her HIV
prevention interventions in South Africa, the interlocking aims of
critical consciousness, peer solidarity and social capital

generate empowerment, or the expansion of agency (Campbell&
MacPhai l; 2002),
HIV AIDS literature treating BCC and other progressive
pedagogic approaches for HIV prevention regards these challenges
as inherent to the empowerment trajectory. Eventually, even when
paired with an indigenous outlook to health education, BCC aims to
induce "culture change". While this model does acknowledge
structural inequalities as one of tho causes for disease, the
emphasis lays on its reconfiguration of sexual norms (Campbell&
Foulis, 2002; Mabala & Allen, 2002). Change only needs to take
place in people' s minds, through a collective process of
negotiation. As Forguson suggests, tho development discourse
reduces the perceived problems as purely technical, and in turn
proposes technical solutions (Ferguson, 1994). Indeed, while the
orthodoxy attributes material, social, cultural wealth to one' s
degree of vulnerability, its remedy only tackles the problem at
Lhe i.ndividual level. Not coincidentally, the institution of
development cannot endorse a path of radical transformation. Its
very language strives for neutrality towards governmental and
political forces (Ferguson, 1994) because it emerges concomitantly
from the same ruling class position. In effect, the development
ins ti tut ion reunites a group of organic intellectuals, in the
Gramscian sense, who craft a theory and praxis to carry out the
responsibility assumed by "First world" towards trans-national,
inter-culture, cross-class concern.
As this section will confirm, the contrast between the
school' sand BCC' s prevention schemes can be summarized as
series of oppositions based on where each approach lays emphasis,
respectively: corporal restraint vs. cognitive strength, rehearsed
attitudes vs. spontaneous subjective attitudes, and an abstracted,

catastrophic mythology for HIV vs. one which construes it as any
other obstacle to be circumvented. More significantly, these
incompatibilities typify the ideological conflict between groups differentially
allocated with power. Upon examining how Lhe youth' s sexual agency manifest Lhe
pedagogic practices and student teacher relalions characterizing Cheleta,

the

ethnography will demonstrate how its attempts to intercept the risk of IllV, are baseJ
on the distribution of material inequities, and the configurations of
governmentality, as we transition into the municipal educational institution' s
relationship Lo Cheleta.

Manufacturing Consent through a
Regime of Discipline
Formal Curriculum
Classroom Theatre: Outline of Pedagogic Practices

After an initial introduction to the Headmaster, :followed by
conversations with the Head Teacher and Deputy Head Master, my
spontaneous visit to the school became a lasting involvement. I
asked if I could teach, and then was asked to vo1ce my preference
for classes. Without delay, I was assigned to teaching Math,
Science, English and Creative Arts at different grade levels, on
different days of the week. Scheduling conflicts would regularly
happen because not all the teachers were aware of my recent
placement, and students often requested I stay on for the next
period. Al though the language of instruction is :in English, except
for Swahili class, my ability to engage students increased with
grade level because of their English improved, and those who were
struggling in the language had left.

The master schedule included time for all subjects tested in
the KCPE, and included P.E., Creative Arts and a time for games
and in library. However, the tested subjects often carried into
the times allocated to the non--tested subjects. Students arrived
by seven thirty, and left as late as four thirty, for mandatory
exam preparations beginning in their penultimate year. Teachers
would arrive earlier, and certain would leave earlier, if they
were not leading afterschool tuitions. In the upper class, twelve
teachers taught six subjects for three grade levels totaling a
max 1mum of 250 students, and a m1n1mum of 210.
In the corner of each cl.ass room is the teacher' stable
which faces a sea of rickety desks, loosely arranged in rows and
col.umn towards the front of the classroom, but receding into an
unclifforentiatccl cluster whore students share their study spaces.
Stuffed in their newspaper lined desks are their worn copybooks,
pencils sharpened to their tail ends, remnants of ballpoint pens
without their plastic case and their miscellaneous personal
possessions. The social cliques carve out the classroom, with the
highest achieving students sitting closest to the teacher' s desk,
and those still struggling with English in the diagonally opposite
corner. Illuminated by the natural light peering through large
windows and rooting door, the students learn in obedient silence.
Although teachers were expected to prepare lesson plans, the
government issued textbooks guided the crux of their instruction.
Similarly, internal examinations, at best only sporadically
arranged, and in those few cases were rarely pre-mecli tatecl. The
teacher projects a loud assertive voice, syncopated to the flow of
the argument or concept being presented. Interspersed in the
lecture, tho teacher would pose questions which foreshadowed the
correct answer, or as a token, add "isn' t it?" at the encl of a

sentence, pronounced to revive noticeably diminishing student
attention. Students responded in the positive, "Yeeeesss,
teacher" , as immediate reflex. Class participation for the
students takes the form of answering questions in chorale,
emphasizing the teacher 's s:ingulari ty and the students
uniformity. Dominating over the rows of students, the teachers
often paces along the length of the blackboard and in between the
narrow passage ways allowed between the desks. Students copied
down the chalked paragraphs covering the entirety of the board,
idem to the paragraphs in their books. During this time, the
teacher would be sitting at their stand, grading homeworks or
inactively overseeing their diligence. Those students lagging
behind are hidden behind a veil of ignorant repetition, following
the chorale lead by the classroom' s best students. When teachers
could not make out a clear answer, then they would repeat and
perhaps elaborate so as to offer another chance. However, rarely
were explanations given for the below average student.
The two teachers who were most active in the school were
aware that their classrooms were deeply stratified, which is
partly why they accepted me, eager to single out for me those
students who needed my attention. They conducted an after school
tuition program for upper primary students to give students the
chance to catch up. During these sessions, the pattern of question
and response in chorale did not play out, since students were
divided in achievement groups, receiving in rotation the
teacher' s attention. Still, these teachers maintained firm
authoritarian relations towards their students. Absences, or
failure to bring the minimal fee were treated with disciplinary
measures.

Adopting a Freirian analysis rings true for explaining
the classroom dynamics. In effect, the teachers at Cheleta
employed the deposition method of instruction. In this pedagogic
sty le, "education-·· becomes an act of depositing, in which the
students are the depositories and the teacher the depositor"
(Freire, 1993; 34). Upholding their teachers' authority and
expertise, students learnt by memorizing and regurgitation,
regardless of their ability for assimilation. In their effort to
improve their students' performance, they upheld a regime of
discipline and obedience. Failure to respect the order of the
classroom and standard of performance called for swift scolding or
physical discipline. These scoldings, which were only reported to
be indirectly by both parties, involved an interrogation into the
reasons for such erring, and then any combination of accusations
from "bad behavior", "poor discipline", stupidity,
"disrespect" "uselessness" and a life without promise.
By governmental decree, HIV prevention has been integrated
across the curriculum so that in their science class, students
learnt about the modes of infection and prevention, and in their
social studies class learnt about its impact and the social
responsibilities community members must undertake, accordingly
(INSERT CITATION). Such information was subjected to be tested 1n
their examinations. Since Christian religious education was also
included 1n the curriculum, students were instructed on the
benefits of abstinence, and matrimonial loyalty, as well as the
sins in pre-marital sex. Curricular teachings were complemented by
intermittent visits from local health agencies with their own HIV
prevention materials. These outreach oriented NGO' s used similar
pedagogic tactics to Cheleta' s teachers, the latter of whom
reasoned that teaching in this way was the most effective means of

reaching
choice"
everyday,
children,
whatever

the youth in such overcrowded classrooms. "We have no
said one teacher, "after universal primary education,
like this morning we have parents enrolling their
we cannot turn them away"· this is why we let you do
you want, these students need to feel special"

The teachers visibly amplified their voices with their sense
of authority for any of the lessons touching upon sexuality or HIV
AIDS. They directed more questions to their students, and made
more deliberate efforts to ensure their audience was following 1n
spirit and in mind. The teachers delivered information about the
disease' s pathology, infection and social impact charged with
forceful concern: "If you don' t wash your hands, you will get
sick''. "If you have sex, without a condom you will be HIV, and
then you will no longer be able to help your family'' . Punctuating
these implied exhortations, they would ask for the chorale to
answer "What will happen if you don' t , .. ?"
In repeatedly delivering HIV prevention messages and commands
for abstinence in the form of threats, the repetition aims to
instill a deep seated fear of sex. Sigmund Freud distilled
psychopathology to the incessant recollection of one or many
fears. The recurrence of such an ominous fear, often from
childhood, stagnates psychic and subsequently developmental
progress. The mind' s inability to move past this menacing
obsession can result in anxiety or even psychosis. Unmistakable
messages are forcibly delivered and then uniformly repeated
(Freud, 1966; 420 ). To bring Freud into this examination of
pedagogic discourse, we can hint at the teachers' intentions, and
by default their ideological practice. Prevention messages
inculcate a fear because they are delivered as a threat and 111 an
authoritarian setting. Now whenever HIV AIDS or sex is broached,

classroom conditioning solidifies an association between this
notorious topic and an internalized fear, giving rise to a
psychological anxiety. This anxiety from the teachers'
perspective was a productive to instill serving as a strategy of
defense. As will be confirmed in a later section threats urged by
the teachers are later mimicked 111 students' responses to my
questions about their :sexuality and health. The Freud' s
conception of psychic pathological development- the interplay of
repetition, fear induced anxiety and trust in authority points
towards, even metaphorically, the implied aims of Cheleta' s
prevention efforts.
Post-Colonial Schools

The integration across the curriculum of HIV prevention
extends a larger historical pattern in the genealogy of Kenya' s
educational structure. This governmental move incurs greater
specialization for school' s curriculum and, reflects a common
trend to reorient the school' s purpose towards catering to
immediate concerns and national interests.
The educational ladder is structured by 8-4-4 year intervals
to allow youth to enter the labor force equipped with a standard
increment of qualifications. This educational trajectory reflects
the instable material situation most Kenyans find themselves in,
demanding young persons at any given moment to take care of their
families and themselves. The fluidity with which young persons are
ostensibly afforded with these intervals may also optimize the
configuration of labor power in the national economy. The
institutional specificity has been critiqued as a mechanism for
underdevelopment. The philosophy of 'adapting education to local
needs' , the mantra guiding educational planners in post-colonial
states descends from the same genealogy of colonial educational

policy which tracked the colonial student since primary school to
fulfill a mercantilist economy' s need for labor, rather than the
uninterrupted international schools which served the elite' s
children (Kelly, 1979; 214). "During the colonial rule and the
years that followed it, the issue for Third World countries become
one of obtaining educational equality with the former metropole 111
the expectation that educational parity would encl unequal
international relationships" (Kelly, 1979; 214). Caught in
perpetual game of cat and mouse, the education suitable for the
new nation' s conditions would seem to perpetuate their
underdevelopment.
The acquisition of locally specialized knowledge persists as
a guiding principle in the textbooks used at Cheleta. In a science
class I had to teach the difference between soft water and hard
water. Their differences were illustrated in scenes of household
chores. In the same chapter, issues of water contamination were
discussed in great detail. The next lesson for the standard seven
students was on the varieties of soil and their human uses.
Science class helped provide technical mastery of resources,
rather than an intellectual appreciation of the scientific method.
Technical instruction mismatches the allegedly disinterested angle
of study in universities and elite grade schools, scientia gTatis
scientiae, which equipped its students to manipulate more
abstracted and generalized models of the human body or
environment. The curricular bent enforces the specialized division
of labor skills. On one encl, specialized school experiences which
adapt to the immediate and local needs rations the educational
experience, abandoning any pretenses for mobility. On the other,
the attempt emulate universal standards of education arguably
holds irrelevant and unrealistic expectations for learning.

The students' familiarity with the scope of topics made the
classes easier to teach than, for example, the weekly samplings of
anthropology that I tried to transmit to my students in the free
period delegated to my unsupervised discretion. The lessons I
crafted took shape from the videos I showed them from my computer,
including titles such as National Geographic' s film rendition of
Guns, Germs and Steele, Hotel Rwanda in its less graphic
moments, La Noire De by Sambene Oussman, and a documentary on
Pharoanic Egypt in order to convey the materiality of realities
which were intriguing yet evasive, and channel their exotic
curiosities for conjuring larger and personally incisive questions
about global diversity and inequities, which our relationship
seemed to epitomize and universal constituencies at the origin of
the social fabric. Localized knowledge embraced the students' home
culture or in another framework, their comparative advantage.
Science, Kiswahili and CRE were the subjects students had least
difficulty with, and more manifestly more engaged.
At the heart of this curricular debate, the issue of how best
to attain individual mobility and national advancement pulses. The
school is supposed to be the main vein for social mobility,
distributing future functions to its clients. Kenyan governmental
policy towards the vast inequalities follows a functional theory
of social stratification. "The catchwords of educational ideology
111 Kenya are expansion, equality of opportunity and advancement by
merit" (Court in Uchendu, 1979; 18). In step with streaming
individuals towards a stock of cultural capital, the school
hatmners in a level of aspiration in accordance to their future
status. A fact well noted in anthropological and demographic
accounts, Sub-Saharan high school graduates comprise a large
portion of the unemployed urban masses, "[a] s the educational

pyramid in most countries 1s sharply tapering 111 shape the ma1n
socializing effect of education is to prepare the majority of
students to accept relatively low status and small rewards"
(Court in Uchendu, 1979; 30). Perversions in the tangible results
from the persuasively iterated expectations taint the credibility
of examinations. Examinations are administer to provide a
benchmark signaling acceleration or regression for the student' s
climb, but in Cheleta, the measure of performance translated a
historical accumulation, rather than a forecast for advancement.
Perhaps only at the extremes in performance die! the governmental
examinations, and random internal tests predict capacity (Court in
Uchendu, 1979; 53). Moreoever, these tests measure abi 1 i ty of the
teachers rather than the students' mastery of the material.
The teachers easily avowed to material dearth provided by the
State, in comparison to the schools Runda residents paid for their
children' s attendance. Interestingly, in acknowledging the
constraints they faced, they felt enti tlecl to take on attitude of
resignation which dictated their professional aspirations. As one
teacher communicated to me; "you know, what can we do here with so
many students coming and going, and very little donations, we can
only try to do our jobs, but we cannot make guarantees for them" .
Cheleta' s Institutional Disintegration
What we have begun to probe at from our discussion of the
larger institutional configurations evinced in Cheleta is what
Foucault designed as governmentality, or the spectrum of practices
from the exercise of state sovereignty to the relations
orchestrated under social institutions who employ tactics of
cultural engineering, al 1 the way to the "technologies of the
self" . "It asks how are people governed, who governs who and
according to which criteria and ethical standards" (Foucault in

Dreyfus & Rabi now, 1983 ; 208). By moving along the continuum of
governmentality towards the higher echelons 6f concentrated power,
the guiding intentions and outlook espoused by the municipal
education apparatus exposes the teachers' performed authoritarian
stances as a recuperating act which masquerades the tenuous
grounds of their professional and institutional validation.
My interaction with Mr. Elogons, my ambassador to the Nairobi
city government, took place in his corner office overlooking the
orthogonal plan of Nairobi' s central business district. From what
I observed 1n the interviews I conducted with him, he spent his
day receiving visiting teachers and staff members from the schools
he supervised or colleagues within the city government, in between
which he continued with his sluggish survey of the Daily Nation
newspaper, laid on top a scantly accoutered desk. In the school' s
file at the City Council Annex, housed al the Chief Advisor of the
School' s offices, the official records documented a long
narrative of internal disruptions, as well as management
irregularities, which cascaded from the swollen, worn out manila
folder. This adherence to documentation protocols seemed
remarkable to me, in juxtaposition to the incompetence and
inconsistencies which it so faithfully recorded.
Case in point, I was briefed on the kleptocratic practices
behind the doors to the school' s main office. One teacher had
taken action against a senior colleague who was colluding with
someone within the City Council who repeatedly turned its blind
eye. In effect, the plaintiff had at an earlier instance commented
on one of his senior colleague' s fear to come forward to testify
the City Council' s anti-corruption agency. At a different point
in time, the file held a series of correspondences between two
teachers and a senior staff member following an initial appeal for

action against one teacher' s "gross insubordination" towards
his supervisor. From there forward, menaces, threats and insults
are detailed 111 a sequence of letters between the parties'
lawyers. The investigations of the allegations followed a few
months later. In the official report, the senior staff member 1s
vindicated; the teachers are exposed for pork barreling and being
bitter reactionaries, who were conspiring to sway the procurement
of materials in service of another distributor, cooperating 111
their plan for self-enrichment- as the record claims, "the
teacher obviously had an interest in the quota" .
In the same way, my informal occupation allowed me to witness
what was just below the surface of authority. At the encl of each
of the summers, after gifting my students, one of the teachers
reminded me of his own needs and desire to receive gifts. This
comment to me made apparent his low morale and desire for
gratification. Consistent with the teachers' complaints about
salary levels, and their frequent 1nqu1ry into about teacher
incomes outside of Kenya directed to me, their dissatisfaction put
into relief the performativity of their authoritarian practices,
which veiled an awkward marginality.
From the perspective of the State aparatus, the school stood
as an egregious case of failure but for Elognos, and his
colleagues to whom he made my introduction, they laid the blame
for failures on the difficulties of the job, rather than on any
perennial tendencies of the teachers. With no affordable housing
in the estate, and without mention of the slum as a possible
housing alternative, the onerous commute made "teachers not
motivated". "The teachers feel like a stranger in Runda
Estate". He echoed the same explanation for the students:
"Children will need a lot of encouragement because they will just

look around .. ·Both pupils and teachers are visitors" . Runda made
of "very rich [who] don' t want to dilute their standard of
living" . Indeed, the school is the only account 1n Runda which
procured City Council' s water, as the elite bathed in privately
commodi ti zed water. The instances of "theft, fights over the
school house, collapsing walls and reports of insubordination and
complaints are the same thing over again". His comments recalled
earlier conversations upon my initial introduction to the school,
when one senior staff member stated point blank that this school
was never any teacher' s first choice placement. Putting across
his frustrations, he rationalized this alarming precedent of
unaccountability: "[the] teachers have stayed there for too
long" .
Whereas students dutifully buy into the school as the path to
social integration through formal legitimacy, the scenes
illustrated in the official file reveal a certain volatility
characteristic of the informal sector. Behind the walls of the
office and staff room, teachers entertain opaque and strained
relationships with their peers and immediate supervisors. In the
absence of fresh relief, teachers are burdened by the
inconvenience and redundancy of their work. The hostilities
displayed by the reported breaches in professionalism emasculate
the State' s estimation of the staff' s expertise. In sum, the
antagonisms between the adults running this primary school paint a
portrait of bureaucratic chaos, which falls in sharp contrast to
the regime of discipline imposed upon its students.
The school' s finds itself socially and geographically
impenetrable to State scrutiny. The larger state apparatus, only
partly subsumes the school under its control, reasoning that the
economic circumstances overwhelm the brachiation of its

sovereignty. To recapitulate the State' s viewpoint, the spatial
distribution of economic inequities creates a labor hoarding
situation because the school cannot take lightly the inelastic
supply for teachers in a labor intensive organization. By default,
school' s insularity also sets the stage for an alienating work
place for the teachers. The students, on their end, require
motivation because of the disconcerting juxtapositions they
witness while cutting through white walled and terracotta tiled
roofed houses on their way to school. Rather than inspire a sense
of mobility, according to official opinions at the municipality,
the presence of the "very rich" signals for the youth their
position of exception and exemption, where in fact they are part
of an impoverished urban majority. Furthermore, the school' s
daily administration simulates for the teachers the qualia of
marginality engendered by the spatial dynamics and housing
conditions lived daily by the students. The geography of the field
site coerces both the teacher and the student into alienation.
As a result of the very inequities which the school
purportedly can convert, labor' s marginal product diminishes
rapidly. Detracting blame from their own apparatus, the State' s
technicians attribute the loss of their power to the colonial
enterprise and the spatialization of its sovereignty. Indeed,
their explanation concentrates on the historical and economic
determinacy of the current situation, and pointing towards the
limited agency of the State' s educational apparatus and its
methods of cultural engineering. One ramification of the state' s
limitations is the unambiguous informality to school.
The teachers' actions insinuate a similar understanding of
the "real relations of society" adopted by the State' s
functionaries (Althusser). Seemingly, both stakeholders welcome

the chance to overwhelm the material consequences of their
nation' s past, but expect little from their solution for systemic
change. To use Marx' s metaphoric topography of the means of
reproduction, their site of attack is at the superstructural
level, which the State and school believe to garner but a low
index of effectivity. Extending the State' s ideology, as we
extrapolated, the set of pedagogic practices regulating the risk
of HIV AIDS posed to youth perform the State' s concession to the
economic base and hence the structural etiology of HIV AIDS.

Extracurricular Activities
Cheleta' s Local Monopoly

Conveniently, this noted informality invited the teachers to
straddle both semi-parental and professional role. Ensconced in
their pedagogic practices, these twin axes for concern and control
illustrate the ideological premises delineating in what way and
for what reason the school takes a hand at producing a healthy HIV
free youthful populace.
The teachers' indifferent or even disdainful attitudes
towards most parents served to warrant their performance of
typically parental obligations. In their choice of stories
narrated to me about what they know of the students' home lives,
the teachers constructed a culture of poverty. In spite of
overstepping their officially delegated responsibilities, their
parental performance worked in harmony with the pedagogy staged 111
the classroom. Similarly, their use of corporal discipline
resonates within this frame of semi-formal and semi-parental
authority. Their enlarged sphere of influence over their students
was advantaged by socio-geographic and institutional isolation of
the field site. Since prevention messages could be strategically

delivered to students 111 intimately poignant ways, the myth
constructed about HIV AIDS the force of fear enhanced 111
One elementary teacher told me the following story about a
girl who repeatedly neglected her homework. After calling her a
side and much probing for an explanation, she is said to have
finally confessed that she could not work at home because her
mother asks her to leave the house during the frequent trips made
by her male visitors. To end, he pronounced a Kikuyu proverb to
keep in mind while teaching and spending time with the students:
'the silent part of the river is the most dangerous" , Other
anecdotes teachers retold similarly focused on what they called
"bad parenting" , such as parents expecting their children to
sell the illegal brew, changaa, after school. They also made
comment about the insularity of Githogoro which accordingly kept
the community stagnant. In these portrayals, economic
circumstances necessitate the youth and their students to enter
into the margins of acceptable behaviors. While the teachers did
not contend that all of Gi thogoro was ful 1 of "bad parents" ,
they called attention to their disapproval for the local mores.
What 1s mystified is that perpetuated insularity and "bad"
parents are responses to a scarcity of resources. Furthermore, 111
discussions of the challenges they face as teachers, and the
consistent failures of the school, teachers invariably cited the
poverty of their students as the constant, rendering for
themselves their own quest for social and moral upheaval relegated
to the realm of fantasy.
In spite of the critique launched against faltering household
standards, their pedagogic methods fol low a logic for behavior
change contingent on a calculus of obedience, which permeates the
household discourse on child rearing (as will be fully elaborated

1n the next section) . Furthermore, whether successful or not 1n
extracting their trespasses, the teachers have projected the
institutional ethic of transparency unfulfilled between the staff
and the insufficiencies of formal recognition for the teacher' s
investment in the students to give way to a position which
hybridizes authoritarian and altruistic stances towards these
youth.
Embodied Performance

The pedagogical orientation of the classrooms also embraced
corporeal discipline to correct students' disobedience. The
persistence of such practices throughout the nation was documented
in a Human Rights Watch report in August of 1999 on Kenya's School
Discipline Regulations (www.hrw.org, 1999). At Cheleta, on
Fridays, students were called aside from their class and assembled
in the inner courtyard. The principal at the head of an elongating
queue, armed with a leather sheath, enacted his power as moral
authority by striking the palms of young women and girls or the
backs of boys and young men. The criteria for warranting this
punishment varied from incomplete homework to insolence. Students
in the lower primary ranks excluded from the enactment of
discipline, watched over with mocking yet fearful gazes. The
public, expedient, and collectively witnessed ritual was intended
to avert future trespassing. Although most of the misbehavior
occurred under the class teacher' s supervision, the headmaster
administered justice. In fact, this was the only duty I ever saw
him perform as headmaster. In interviews, students and teachers
revealed having received and performed identical disciplinary
action in their homes, respectively. For the disciplinarian,
striking physically adheres to the regime of discipline and
obedience seen necessary for proper development. The forbidden

pleasure enjoyed by the student is negated when the headmaster
exerts physical control over her body. This punishment asserts an
immediate causality between behavior and reward, similar to the
automated pattern of question and answer of the classroom.
Finally, rather than being compelled to internalize the ethic of
discipline reigning over the school, students obey out of fear.
The student' s recognition of misbehavior is externalized: as
opposed to fostering an intuition for discerning good from bad,
the teachers perform violence to legitimate their incontrovertible
discrimination. Good and bad for the students are not only
inherent in the acts, but their ability to evade the teachers
surveillance. As is to be expected, these practices mold the
student' s capacity for self recognition and self-improvement ton
according to their sensation of fear.
Counseling as Moral Education

Unsatisfied by the depths of their biopower, the teachers
play the role of moral guidance counselors. By enforcing a
standard of abstinence, the teachers' semi-parental role
reinforces their formal professional role which they conduct
through a regime of discipline. Abstinence, taken as the epitome
of self restraint and internal strength is understood by their
pedagogic practice and ideological premises to be externally
condi tioncd.
To counteract promiscuous behavior, one senior teacher
commented on his general strategy for prevention, "··· just
education and counseling to shift their behavior." Counseling 1n
these instances was geared towards counteracting promiscuous
behaviors. In one such occasion, when the sexes had been
segregated, the teacher made the memorable statement: "If you
have sex, you can get pregnant, you can get HIV/AIDS and it is

very, very bad". As portrayed by the teachers, the act of sex was
the trigger for their students' downfall. Youth sexuality was
presented as a threat to their wellbeing- making abstinence the
only sensible choice. Towards the end of such conversations,
teachers would clarify that positive role of sex within the
confines of matrimony. According to conversations with students,
the message sent to the men was to control their libidinal drive;
to the girls it was to "stay away from those boys" recounted
Sofia. Physical and social contact would keep them away from
harm' sway. Moreover, teachers' also laid emphasis on the risk
of sexual violence, in line with embedding the delivery of sexual
education as a threat. Later, he revealed his "use of anecdotes
of HIV positive people" to illustrate the gravity of the disease.
He specifically recalled showing images of women who have lost
their fallopian tubes supposedly after contracting the virus. In
effect, both his counseling and anecdotal illustrations serves to
"sensitize" the students. His responsibility as teacher and
counselor required him to "sensitize" his students, but he
clarified the limits of his role in asserting that he held no
actual responsibility for the actions of his students.
The moralistic overtones and content of prevention
information were delivered in measured doses calibrated to their
students' age or stage of development. One senior teacher
discouraged condoms, explaining that "sexual education 1s taught
i.n stages .. ·. For primary students, it 1s not appropriate to concede
sexual activity" . In secondary school, he clarified, condoms
could be discussed. By capping off their what their students learn
by what the teachers believed they should not, they teachers 111
very real and deliberate ways str~ctured the students developing
sexual 1i ves.

Penetrations and Extractions

In truth, the teachers were the most enthusiastic of my
informants, particularly when my questions centered on their
students' personal lives, making clear the extent of their
investment in their professional responsibilities. As I posed more
questions to the teachers regarding their students' relationships
amongst themselves, and those entertained with other individuals
external to the school, it seemed apparent to me that I had
entered a sphere of measured curiosity. The curricular
integration of HIV prevention only bolstered the teacher' s active
hunt for the promiscuity amongst the ranks of their classrooms.
The teachers' impressions of their students tended to inflate
the extent of their sexual experimentation, relative to the
individual students' estimates. In my own search, I knew that ten
students of the 54 in standard eight were sexually experienced.
The teachers' estimate of sexually active students was
accompanied with regret for the situation and with a disavowal for
student' s parents as wel 1 as the "bad behaving" students. Despite
their head-shaking at the thought of their pupils' active sexual
1 i ves, the head teacher and original deputy head master envisioned
themselves as instigators of a gradual change. Since their arrival
a few years ago, higher standards of discipline, they believe,
have been enforced. They make the claim that promiscuity has been
accordingly curbed.
The team of two 111 particular presented themselves as
teachers who established their authority in transforming teacherstudents relationships. In the upper primary classes, when
students entered adolescence, there was a noticeable increase 111
attention paid to the students' interior and out of school lives.
Despite classrooms that were full beyond their official capacity,

if they made the discovery of some deviation, such as consistently
poor performance or susp1c1on was raised of sexual precocity,
their focus would become singular 1n extracting the truth. These
two teachers purposefully choose the students who preserved an
opaque distance. The team's interventions with specific students
indexed their problematization of the student' s interior life,
which they expressed as worry. Still, they strove for an ideal of
transparency which was evidently one-sided. They hoped to convince
their students of the sympathy they expressed while also placing a
host of moral expectations.
For example, when explicit letters were once found detailing
romantic relationships between the exposed school girl and some
anonymous boy, the new Deputy Head relied on his counselor
training. He described the protocol of investigation, stressing
Lhe composure he assumes in confronting the student. After he
called her aside, and he alleges that she gradually produced a
penitent confession. She qualified her indiscretion with a
"'"but, Sir, I' m not alone" . The blame, now shared was
dissipated but prompted him to conduct a witch hunt- the results
of which he presented as eerily exact numerical compilations: 20
out of 21 girls and 15 of the 27 boys in standard eight were
sexually experiences. He punctuated these shocks with a relishing
grin. How he was able to quote these figures so fluently?' I asked
him, several times to prove the validity of his claims. Finally,
he uncovered the use of "spies" 1n lower classes, often siblings
or neighbors who would come into the main office if they ever
discovered any aberrations in their upper classmates behavior.
This was obviously confidential. When I asked students if they

knew of any such undercover communications, they did not believe
that anything of the sort took place without their knowledge.
The impetus to delve into these students private lives speaks
once again to their pedagogic ideology. Through their authority as
elders, professionals and government employees, they could
justifiable coerce transparency. What many readers may read as an
infringement of privacy transpires intrinsically in teacher
student relation accustomed at school. Theorist and activist I van
Illich summarizes on the unique position of the school teacher in
relation to her students,
"schoolteachers and ministers are the
only professionals who feel entitled to pry into the private
affairs of their clients at the same time as they preach to a
captive audience" (Illich, 1971; 31).

Impact of Consumption
Homosocially Disciplined
In my presence, the students' attitudes towards the other
gender did not vary, all preserved the standard of chastity
expected of them. In focus groups, the truth more easily came out.
If one student did admit to having a boyfriend, and no one else
did, they would speak on their friends behalf, once again sharing
what they saw was a common blame. Men were more easily honest
about their relations than girls were. Their self-identifications
were modulated by their degree of deviance from the norm of school
enrollment and sexual respectability. In addition, the tightest
social groups visible were those who were least active in class,
often because of language barrier and their autonomous behavior.

The female youth expressed general disdain for the male youth
of their class, except for the ones who excelled in the classroom.
Male youth also felt reproached by their female peers, making most
soci.ali.zation at school was homosocial.
"You know teacher, those girls, they are always laughing,
why do they always laugh .. ?"
"Those girls, they are always touching themselves like this,
1 ike that" , gesturing to his chest
"Teacher, those boys, they try to make you play with them,
but we don' t want them"
Moreover, those youth who had romantic engagements had clear
demarcations for appropriate and inappropriate behavior in school.
While petting was considered acceptable on the weekends while on a
walk with their romantic partner, such behavior was strongly
condemned against those who disrespected the school' s
sovereignty. Male and female youth both used that line of
demarcation to prove their respectability. In our conversations,
they cited rumors of sexual permissiveness at school which they
showed their disapproval for. Particularly, they looked down upon
younger students who apparently went to the fields behind the
school for sexual experimentation, as well as female students who
also allegedly met adults during recess or lunch time and
prostituted themselves. These rumors of covert sexual
experimentation during circulated repeatedly and were cited more
than once by students. Teachers however rejected their veracity,
as did other students.

Misrecognitions and Demystifications of School's Promises
Students currently attending Cheleta could not to express
either in English or Swahili their feelings towards the school 1n
abstract, with one exception who commented on the stress he felt
for what would happen to him after his final year. They had
definite preferences for teachers who was not biased by their
ethnic identity when choosing who would be selected for certain
privileges such as when a wealthy private academy offered to bring
some students to play football in their lawns during the weekends,
and distaste for those who seemingly did. They regretted one
senior teacher' s departure who unlike his other senior colleague
"told us useless stories" during class. It seemed they placed
value on well directed classrooms and reduced physical
correction. Many youth spoke out against the hierarchical order.
In their complaints, they challenged receiving unequal respect
from teachers, relative to other students, and the punishments
they felt they could receive very arbitrarily. No students
displayed their blatant disregard for school, and largely
indifferent to the particular ways they learnt, played or related
to their teachers. Still while in school, they assured me that
they were still receiving a "good education"
In general, students who were not able to continue Lo
secondary school, particularly the men expressed regret for not
being able to continue. Even those who anticipated continuing
doing manual labor after secondary school tried to find ways to
get free secondary education. These youth were not aware of any
job opportunities outside of Runda; their job search was mostly
random. Their employers' hesitation to hire them, as they
explained to me was that other adults had more education. Their
youth marked them as students, rather than able bodies.

International high schools are financially out of the
question for these youth; heretofore even government funded
schools were inaccessible to Cheleta student (iii). Last year, a
scholarship from an insurance company guaranteed tuition and board
to the highest female and male scores on the KCPE. Nationally, 11%
of Form I will have dropped out by their final year (UNESCO
Nairobi, 2006; 25). For all the alumni, their permanent distance
from their primary school unsettled their previous
characterizations of having provided a "good education" ,
particularly for those students who were sponsored and were
worried their offers would be rescinded if they didn' t improve
their below average performance, which they altogether blamed on
their alma mater.
One of my old pupils Fanwell, 17 looks back at Cheleta after
having missed his KCPE by a few points: "It is not a good
education". Ho mentioned "tardiness" of tho staff members as
one of its problems.
For Fanwell, the school' s unreliable standing posed a
substantial impediment since his parents refused to pay for him to
repeat his last year in light of the staff "misusing money". His
wage g1vers reluctantly choose him. Often, they tell him to go to
school, and pick older men for the job. In this transitory year,
he confesses that he "is not happy like the others". Another
alumnus made echo to the faltering standards at Cheleta, James
Jenga, 21, collllllented "at that time [Cheleta] was better,
management now 1s very poor, schools are dirty".
The institutional validation conferred by school enrollment,
particularly passage into the secondary level was achieved or
desired by the large majority of my students. In exchange for

interviews, students could choose to have their portrait
photographed; on several occasions open textbooks, old exam sheets
served as props in these male youth' s self representation. Other
props were the packets of chips I had served the students in
exchange for answering my questions, with which they posed with.
The widespread faith placed in the institution of education has
been well commented in the Kenyan context, which has resulted in
greater legitimacy for authoritative teachers. The larger impact
on society which has ensured from the impression of institutional
legitimacy has been that the "[ .. ·] unemployed internalized norms
which lead them to accept their position by seeing themselves as
unfortunate, or personally derelict, losers 111 a basically just
system" (Court in Uchendu, 1979; 55). The youth seem to be
interpellated by the institutional feature the school represents,
but weary of its particular administration at Cheleta. They seemed
somewhat blinded by the fact that their reality appeared to be an
exception to those of other youth who supposedly went to better
schools.

Consenting to the School's Myth of HIV AIDS
In order of importance, students derived their information
about HIV/AIDS their official curriculum, mass media, peers, and
parents. The integration of HIV/AIDS into the science and social
studies curricula ensured that facts about the disease' s
transmission, its health effects and the ramifications it had on
society were memorized to varying extents of detail. In the semistructured interviews and KAB questionnaires, it became clear that
the school provided accurate information. Furthermore, many
acknowledged their vulnerability to the disease.

Often in the same language as used in their textbooks,
students sununarized the tragic irreversibi.li ty of HIV/AIDS while
still stressed the need to maintain hope for those infected and
their care takers. When pushed further to elaborate upon this
ambiguous balance, students were mostly confused. In effect,
memorization of countless lectures and texts was responsible for
such sophisticated responses, despite the poverty of knowledge and
tools in the fundamental subjects. Kenya has been praised for its
intervention techniques, particularly in delivering accurate
information to its citizenship (UNAIDS, 2005). By repeating HIV
related knowledge in science class, social studies class and
during reading comprehension exercises, accurate information about
HIV 1s memorized.
Students were uninformed about contraception besides
abstinence and condom use. Even for condoms, no student conveyed
to me when or how one ought to place it successfully. Moreover,
the rel.ative risks of each mode of transmission were not
elaborated: students cited going to the barber or sharing needles,
just as frequently as they mentioned unprotected sex when
enumerating how one could get HIV, although it seemed unlikely due
to their evident financial constraints that they would be able to
pay for a barber or intravenous drugs. Prostitution and rape were
cited as the riskiest of sexual behaviors, as opposed to sex
without protection.
Just as the authoritarian "deposition" type pedagogy
paralyses the students in an illusion of social mobility with this
knowledge that has not been assimilated or derived, but memorized,
this approach extended to the construction of HIV. HIV/AIDS was
construed as a fact of nature which in itself catalyzed the
disintegration of the individual. In the teachers' statements,

personality traits and circumstantial behaviors increased one' s
risk. The school sought to eradicate these root causes. The
dramatic descriptions constructed about HIV are not totally
incorrect. In Kenya, the impact of AIDS has in fact been
disastrous. Yet, students could come to terms with how HIV would
actually enter their own lives. The myth of the disease as the
ultimate threat abstracts it from the grasp of the students'
daily lives. Even though AIDS is a reality in their community- 47
out of 56 students in standard eight knew at least someone in
their neighborhood infected with HIV, often the same persons, they
demonstrated little curiosity as to how that person may have
gotten infected. Students imagined AIDS in abstraction, as a
social and individual superpower. Rather than seeing it embedded
in the risks of certain interactions, behaviors and judgment, AIDS
was an i1mnaterial but daunting threat. Across the board, this myth
1s evinced in the students' professed fear of the virus, although
no one actually considered themselves to be personally and
currently vulnerable to it. It seemed that student were acutely
aware of the moral panic surrounding AIDS, and issued echoes to
the devastation it causes, and the dangerous behaviors it
signifies. Some students in questionnaires indicated that AIDS was
a punishment for sin, while most preferred a moralistic rather
than theological epidemiology. Yet, AIDS did not enter the logic
of their everyday lives. This fear was only summoned at the
mention of HIV/AIDS or when its semantic field was evoked.

Critique of Critique
If ideology is inevitable, Friere' s antidote, 1s
indoctrinating students to acknowledge their constant struggle
against the knowledge they have acquired and its means of
transmission. In destabilizing the student teacher hierarchy and
in adopting what he labels critical pedagogy, students are
equipped with the critical consciousness to unveil the means of
their oppression. In sum, its teleological trajectory engenders
collective liberation through systematic and intensifying
demystification.
In effect, this critical pedagogy has shaped the trends in
prevention to give way to a new orthodoxy which privileges the
cognitive and interior dimensions as tho site and stake to
transform the marginalized social agent. The method of HIV
prevention and its motivating ideology triumphed by international
health and development agencies falls in line with Friere' s
V1Sl011.
As was previously elaborated, the eminent critique of
Cheleta' s authoritarian approach to HIV prevention and youth
targeted interventions argues that healthy attitudes towards
sexuality cannot be cultivated through impositions but must be
stimulated dialogically in a judgment free space. This way of
thinking assumes that authenticity cannot be rehearsed or
externally systematized. According to Friere the pattern of
repetition and the issuing of prevention by manipulating threats
entraps the subject in a position of fear and dependence. The
liberation explicitly characterized in critical pedagogy and now
ubiquitous 111 Western pol i.tical movements, its feminisms
particularly, measures one' s agency as a transcendence from or

trespass against custom, and heteronomy which are equated to
oppression (Mahmood, 2001; 207). Saba Mahmood draws the contrast
between the ideological definition of agency in the Western
feminist struggle, and the one offered through a women' s Islamic
revival movement in Egypt. The distinctions she lays out opens an
alternative conception of agency which effectively disarms
Friere' s universalizing mission for critical consciousness and
resistance. Her account makes plain the essential linkage
underlining liberalism between self fulfillment, resistance and
individual autonomy (Mahmood, 2001; 207). The Islamic revival
under study furnishes an alternative path to self realization
through docility or sabr, rather than resistance. As she states
(Mahmood, 2001; 212):
[ .. ·] the ability to effect change in the world and in oneself
1s historically and culturally specific (both in terms of what
constitutes "change" and the capacity by which it is effected),
then its meaning and sense cannot be fixed a priori, but allowed
to emerge through an analysis of the particular networks of
concepts that enable specific modes of being, responsibility, and
effecti vi ty. ···What may appear to be a case of deplorable
passivity and docility from a progressivist point of view, may
very well be a form of agency-one that must be understood in the
context of the discourses and structures of subordination that
create the conditions of its enactment
Mahmood' s comments force us to reconsider our critique of
the students' docility as a vulnerabilizing factor in their risk
of HIV. Agentival capacity is not bound to negating power. It is
thus plausible to understand the youth' s commitment to discipline
as not only an affirmation of ideology, but simultaneously
the deliberate enactment of their self preservation.

Concurrently, we have put in motion a critique of the school
and a critique launched against this former interpretation so to
avoid Manichean reduction. At its heart, this deconstruction
expounds an ethical assessment of education, the sum total of
schools and their internal and external administration. Since we
are dealing with education as it treats youth sexuality 111
relation to the risk of HIV, our assessment seeks to evaluate harm
reduction. The structure of education and the nature of
instruction can be judged according to how well they insure
heal thy and satisfactory lives to these youth, in the short and
long term.
At Cheleta, fear is used to generate a protective anxiety
around pre-marital sexuality, which is certainly one way of
preventing early sexual initiation, and HIV AIDS. This fear was
no Li ceab ly internalized by the students, but HTV ATDS was not at
the forefront of their concerns. Whereas for the teachers,
abstinence and sexual virtue formed certain discursivities around
the topic of HIV AIDS, their moral panic was centered on the
dissolution of discipline they perceived at home.

GITHOGORO
It is difficult to understand how acutely visible l. was when
I walked with my students around Gi thogoro. "Mzungu, Mzungu" ,
"Hello Mzungu, how are you mzungu?" , stares, and obvious side
conunentary encased my unexpected penetration in the place most of

my students called home. My intent to draw in the families and
communities of the students into this research may seem obvious to
the reader, but to be explicit, I can explain in the following
ways. First of all, my students wanted me to pay visits to their
parents. My visits strengthened my relationship with the keener
students. Some of those who took me to their homes would become
the peer educators in the heal th education class, and a year later
some would help coordinate interviews. Second, I wanted to
determine for myself what my students' parental cultural and home
atmosphere comprised off rather than accept their teacher' s
'
villanized portrayal.
In the framework for our metonymy, Githogoro represents not
only the students' parental culture, but vis a vis the State,
which is partly invested in the school apparatus, it stands in as
the larger society which the educational structure is supposed to
serve. Alternatively, in relation the ruling class controlling the
formal sector, Githogoro encloses the urban poor engaged in the
informal sector. These labels do in fact produce certain
simplifications, but the force of our metonymy only functions by
deducing from these pieces presented the more general and
abstracted unit of power.
Before startin~ I had objectively anticipated a diverse
sample that included community members of all ages, of all
occupations and language groups, to justify the link between my
empirical findings and its metonymic entity. Inevitably, the
biases of ethnography tilted my sample, obfuscating the
significance it carried to understand the population group.
I conducted my :interviews in English which clearly increased
the bias of an already self-selected sample of Githogoro residents

willing to talk to me. Gradually, as my presence became known, and
people got word of the compensation I offered, I was approached,
and not longer resorted to my students' networks of adult
acquaintances. Their social networks certainly consisted more of
their own 1inguistic and ethnic group, al though amongst th ems elves
five groups were included. In the encl, I had conduced fifteen
parent interviews (11 mothers and 5 fathers) of students that I
had previously or currently taught. I also had 35 interviews with
mostly young adults, many of whom still qualify as "youth"
normatively defined by the Kenyan census as between the ages of
15-24. Many were young women under the age of 30, who were
married with young children in primary school, along with their
male counterparts of the same age based peer group. A minority
represented individuals above the age of 30, with older youth or
adults as their children. These unanticipated biases required that
I shift how I would conceptualize Githogoro as an ideological
apparatus. In addition to providing insight into my students'
household experience, the participation of young informants
allowed me to gage the possible life trajectories my students
could embark on when they finished or left the school system.
Looking at demographic trends helps justify the apparent
youth bias. High fertility, on average 5 children per woman,
coupled with an average lifespan of 51 years give shape to a true
pyramid graph for the population' s age distribution (UNAIDS,
2006). Figures for Kiber~ the second largest slum in Afric~ and
the largest in Nairobi approximate that half of the population is
under the age of fifteen; this helps relate the young bias in this
senn- urban population. Many individuals cited their primary
motive for remaining 111 Githogoro was to gain money, which 111
order for them to do so assumes certain capacities and

dispositions, favoring certain bodies over others. Also, the
overrepresentation of women can be accounted for by the fact that
they were more likely to be home during the day, which for
security reasons was the only time I went to Githogoro. Finally,
few informants were employed full time, not to mention in the
formal sector. Although most residents controlled no wealth of
their own, there were certain individuals who had deeds to
permanent residences on a strip of Githogoro. These individuals,
excluded from these findings, would have been less enticed by the
compensation I could offer for a recorded conversation, and
perhaps excluded from the inner core of my students' networks. As
such, only one of my informants fell 111 this elite category and
his interview contributed more to my historical understanding of
Githogoro, as he had lived in the vicinity when Runda' s lands
were a collection of coffee plantations.
Mariam, to whom I am greatly indebted, was introduced to me
by one of my old students Boniface. She let me use her house to
conduct many of the interviews, and recruited her friends and
acquaintances for my interviews. The geographic position of her
house was conveniently located for my purposes and those residents
who entered and exited Githogoro frequently, but was in one of the
extremities of Githogoro' s amoebic layout. Her house, neighboring
a sizable landfill, internally isolated but central to external
communication would definitely impact the composition of my
informants, some of whom were travelling towards my two week
station in her home.
Now that these disclaimers testify to the circumstances
governing my research, the content my questions elicited amounted
to a collection of personal histories which tracked how my
interlocuteurs first learnt what sex and HIV AIDS were, their

first sexual experiences, subsequent encounters, and how HIV AIDS
entered their consciousness thereon out. After talking about their
internal lives, our conversations focused on their construction of
HIV and sexuality and how these two issues shaped their
interactions with their children, their spouses, their caretakers, families, crnmnuni ty and country. These findings are
supplemented with youth focus group data which centered on their
household culture. The category of youth is constantly evoked or
is the demographic identity categorizing the informants. The
triangulation offered is a myriad social constructions which
inform the nebulous mythology of HIV AIDS produced by a diverse
urban population. The circulation of messages is much more
difficultly disambiguated into stages of manufacture, consumption
and reinvestment as was possible in the school context. bricolage
of subjectivity as it is framed in the home by sexuality betokens
the ideological family apparatus, and the relations entertained
between its diffuse kinship branches.
Badly Behaved
What can be directly extrapolated from the discourse
generated in interviews is the social etiology of AIDS. In the
consciousness of this agglomeration of Kenyan civil society, the
rooL causes of HIV AIDS encompassed personality traits, structural
affects, and cultural phenomena. "Bad behavior" was most
frequently cited, but was only intermediary effect of a non-moral
cause. If one had such "bad behavior" , then she was confronted
with the full risk of HIV. However, "bad behavior" did not
accrue solely from personal choice, but was produced from events
and circumstances outside the individual' s control. Elaborated 111
what follows are the regularly identified catalysts for
inculcating "bad behavior" in youth.

Janet, 29: "Where I am from, don' t get married so young,
don' t socialize with men. We are afraid. In the cities we are
scared because we are aware because [there is a]great chance of
sin"
Just as 111 Janet' s statement, as she distinguished the
strict homosocial mores maintained outside the city, and
temptation' s ubiquity in the urban space, many others echoed the
inextricable urban character of the HIV pandemic. After his
experience teaching HIV prevention in school, Maxwell, 21 noticed
that "people in the city have more sex and are less
disciplined" . Somehow, the combination of population density, and
"modernity" subdues the agent and depletes her discipline.
Maxwell attributed television to its high prevalence, common
mostly in the cities of Kenya. He concluded by saying, "even if
you ignore the bible, [HIV] is a killer disease" .
The media was another origin of risk flagged because it
sanctioned early exposure to sex. The agent becomes precociously
aware by an act of voyeurism. The precocity seen to predispose the
individual to HIV AIDS in the imagination of many Githogoro
residents actually reduces risk according to the construction of
disease disseminated by global health agencies. Within this latter
ideological position, youth must know the dynamics of the sexual
encounter laden with gender imbalances, emotional investments,
cultural expectations, and health consequences before enduring the
experience personally. Otherwise, without full knowledge, the
agent is vulnerable. What precisely early exposure constituted
varied. The age threshold for when information no longer
detrimental or risky was vaguely connoted.

While voyeurism and mass mediated information increased risk,
the stigma re1gn1ng over household discussions about HIV and
sexuality was also found by the younger mothers to vulnerablize
the youth to disease. Evelyn, 28 on the topic of HIV asserted,
"it' s a big problem, parents don' t monitor [youth] don' t
understand what this love means". When I ask her to elaborate,
she tells me "parents don' t talk to their children about sex, it
is because parents fear that they will think that their parents
are bad· .. they don' t want their children to know what happened to
them". Evelyn ultimately remarks on intricacies of transparency,
since implementing the appearance of self evidence can undermine
parents' authority just as the attempt to consolidate it.
One informant wishing to remain anonymous explained HIV 111
the following way:
"Poverty causes people to be idle and consume
alcoholism amongst men. Many of those men see prostitutes"
"Prostitutes'' 1s effectively a category synonymous with HIV. The
isolation of disease to risk groups, the use of which is now
considered outmoded by HIV prevention orthodoxy, holds currency 111
Githogoro' s social imagination. James, 18, "HIV is because of
prostitutes and homosexuals; I am not scared of getting it" .
Prostitutes were mentioned in most conversations, but no one could
tell me where they could be found. As Peter, 26 recounted, "they
don' t believe they are prostitutes". Based on these comments,
prostitution could signify a range of behaviors on the spectrum of
sexual behaviors, not only a person who survived exclusively on
clientele for income. Despite the amorphous classifications,
disease was easily attributed to members of risk groups, because
their sexually aberrant actions quintessentially embodied the
''bad behavior'' equated to HIV.

Believing in the Material or the Spiritual
David, 56: "If you don' t have a job and joke with sex, you
lose everything. In speaking about the youth specifically in
regards to HIV AIDS, "first thing they must believe in Jesus, if
you are saved nothing can happen to you"
Maxwell 21.:

"I am God fearing···you always do the right

thing" .
Janet, 29:

"Trust yourself and you won' t get HIV"

In these replies, there is an equivalence made with
structural integration or with religious adherence to risk
reduction. In effect, fear of or faith in, or both, the
metaphysical conferred protection, just as an assigned role 111 the
economy exacts a certain insulating habitus. Other common replies
focused on corporal and hormonal restraint, placing the etiology
within the agent' s body, as if she were fighting against herself.
As for the physical methods of prevention, most cited going to VCT
with their partners while condom use appeared to be less common.
The importance of material arose around how youth could
secure relationships in the first place. Although men seemed to
have an earlier debut than women, by their late adolescence and
entry into their twenties, men needed money to stay sexually
active. Whereas, men perceived women as having more chances to
enter romantic engagements after terminating their schooling,
women acknowledged being swayed by feelings of shame, or feeling
powerless rather than attempt to negotiate the terms of sexual
intercourse because of their financial dependence.

Fanwell, 17: "Girls can get married even after Standard
8... Girls don' t want us because we don' t have money to give
them" .
George, 21: Met his girlfriend in Church seven months ago.
After three months, "he agreed to her". He wants give her the
opportunity to finish school. As a Christian, we are saved and a
. ' "
v1rg1n
"Life is not stable, money is not enough to carry that
lady" .
Jenga, 21: "G.1r 1s like people with money, they are asking
for too many expenses" . About sex, "If you are to do it, you
must have money··· I don' t want to spoil someone' s life"
Community Ethos

Directing the conversation towards the problems present in
Githogoro yielded discussions about the "village vices'', as
Steven, 22 put it to me. Loitering in public space was cited as
indication of moral degeneracy. Instead of being at home, where
one contributes to the household, loitering is associated with
deviating from the integrating and wholesome functions of the
family. In this moral economy, the virtues of productivity and
purpose oppose erring whether spatially or psychologically. For
instance, many women identified poor parenting in those parents
who allowed their young children to roam Githogoro' s thoroughfare
without supervision.
For Steven, "village vices" specifically makes reference to
drugs, liquor and changaa, the illegal brew. In parallel to
problematization behavior, poverty and unemployment were
invariably and evidently mentioned, often too the lack of schools.
These absences explained the incidence of school drop-outs, early
marriage, pregnancies and prostitution. When cmmnenting on the

"village vices" , those who had identified such behaviors as such
also elaborated on how they made sense of these behavioral
aberrations.
Evelyn, 28: "most people have different behaviors which you
learn how to deal with· .. [you] have to accept it, don' t say its
bad .. · I can' t change people' s choice"· have to accept it" .
Janet, 29: "I like Githogoro because I can get something"
"I don' t want to be social here, people have born here, just
want to get money". As for her husband, who was born into this
conununi ty "if he has a lot [of friends with him], I' 11 leave him
so I don' t want to know" .
These attitudes highlight a looming suspicion between fellow
community members, as well' as the strictly functional aspect of
shared space. Frustrated with prevailing patterns of
socialization, it seemed that many residents retreated into their
immediate concerns, disinterested in upholding a crnrununi ty ethos.
There seemed to be division between natives and migrants to
Githogoro, which appeared divisive by some characterizations.
Another clear division took place in Githogoro between
Whenever I requested to be introduced to any HIV positive
individuals, my informants and students were never certain as to
where exactly they lived or how to reach them. Everyone cited
rumors of people with HIV, but it seemed that none socialized with
them, or didn' t wish to tell me so. The one woman Mariam knew of
never left the house, and refused visitors. Also indicative, was
that residents and students based their diagnosis of these
invisible victims on their chronic illness, alienation from the
community, and perceptible physical weakness. From these
subjective assessment of symptoms, rumors proliferated.

Githogoro towards Cheleta
Those who could afford private school preferred to send their
children there for their primary education. Cheleta Primary School
and other public schools were discredited for their low quality
standards and corruption. As Evelyn, 28 put it "no one knows what
they teach at the public schools", choosing to send her daughter
to a private school inside Githogoro. Most of the youth who were
parents, or those who started to be parents when they were youth,
and now over 24 did not benefit from free primary education. Close
to all made it to standard 8. Those who continued secondary school
could not afford to pay to complete all four forms. Location was
Cheleta' s main appeal. In the majority of cases, it was parents'
and caretakers' only choice. One James, 32 directed his criticism
against Universal Primary Education which has made his daughter' s
school overly crowded. The increasing use and desire for more
private schools in Githogoro was mentioned frequently.
Hesitant Sexualities
The work environment was repeatedly cited as a place of
interaction where romantic and sexual engagements could
potentialize. Following initial introductions, sometimes followed
by courtship where uncertainty and opacity kept the two partners
at a distance, they would become a couple. No one had been in a
relationship before marriage that their parents had explicitly
encouraged. All youth romantic relationships were discrete and
remained either unacknowledged or unknown by the youth' s
authority figures. Marriage was in effect the product of secret
relations, which by external or internal will is made public.
Through series of lies to the external worl.d, couples built their
base of future stability. Parents may not have approved of their
marriage choices, but eventually informants said their spouses

were accepted. Few had resisted pre-marital sex, those who did
cited strong religious beliefs or deep seated myths: Janet, 29
said she learnt in social studies not to play with boys and, said
"my sister told you that if boys touch your breasts you get your
menses". This convinced her to avoid her male peers in school.
Moreover, for no one was pre-marital accepted in their household.
Not a single person had planned for their first sexual
encounter. Depending on their emotional and temporal distance,
they expressed fondness, regret, or hilarity towards that memory.
Sara, 24: ''The first time [together], I wasn' t free with
him .. [he] asked to visit my mother and friends. " At some point
after they had also visi tee! his parents, her husband asked her to
sleep with him, she "felt ashamed to refuse because of they he
treated [me]" .
Lois, 18: Chuckling, she says "I was 1n adolescent state" .
"It was his first time, don' t know why I chd···I fear he was very
stubborn, he could beat me". Her parents knew "because people
started spreading when they went to his house". Her parents
started "being harsh to me" .
James, 18: When asked about sex, he said his friends had
"f orcecl h'1111 " . He saic
. l 1. t "was not a good idea. . the clay wi 11
come" . He forgot about using a condom, "l have not mind that"
He insisted that "she took him" .
Only my sexually inexperienced informants were clear as to
when they would choose to have sex, and proved reasons for
upholding their virginity.
Jacquilene, 16: She has never had a boyfriend. She was tol.d
"Others are clisturbing···boys
"not to engage in such behaviors"

trying to play at you···People like to talk on the phone [with
boys] but I don' t know why"
Fanwell, 17:

"I am too young to have sex".

Youth Sexuality

Youth romance was kept away from parents' knowledge. If
discovered, parents could take drastic measures. When Monica' s
mother found out she was sexually active, she said that Monica, 21
was "dead to her" and urged her to hold off for a few years.
Sara, 24 had to lie to her parents and tell them she was visiting
her cousins when she went to Mombasa with her boyfriend, now
husband. Her parents strongly disapproved of her pre-marital
sexual relations but she remarked "what can they do to stop
me?". They eventually kicked her out when they found out, and as
a result married her husband. "Now they [her parents] approve.
In fewer cases, parents accepted the situation without
condoning the behavior. Instead they were offered practical
guidance. Ann Toki, 22 quoted a conversation with her mother "if
I choose that I continue doing it, I must not go out, stick to
that one", One father speaking about his teenage daughters:
"Whatever I dislike, she will do··· Nowadays, life is very hard,
don' t roam, just stick to one· .. If you got a girlfriend, just get
one'' He himself had sex after he finished his schooling. "By
that time, it was very simple, you can trust people" . He
remarked "sex, you can' t teach- very difficult, they will learn
just the way you do".
Men said that they could not discuss matters about sexuality
with their daughters. This kind of encroachment was deemed
disrespectful. For Maxwell, 21 and his children, he says that at
the age of 12 he thinks it would be the right time for his

daughter to know about sex. "As a father, you can' t talk to your
girl··· [it] doesn' t create a good picture···" . He found out about
sex at school and in church seminars which he thinks is the right
way. The veneer of purity which these silences between parent and
their youth are supposed to protect, is also and always a reminder
of the fact that the youth are viewed as a threat of and
threatened by moral corruption. On the other hand, Young mothers,
who would talk to their children about sex, singled out those who
didn' t as being fearful of their own children. They cited
embarrassment, as well as facing the risk of having to divulge
their own "deviances"
Intergenerational interface

As evinced by the menaces of sexually active teen becoming
"dead" to their parents, or physically abandoned, other
deviations can come with serious material consequences. Youth had
the option of satisfying the various expectations placed on them
or to be alienated, at least 111 the short term. Conversations
reveal little negotiating power with their parental generation.
James, 18 attended Cheleta in 1998. After his mother got 111
trouble with the police for brewing changaa and left for Ruaka,
his stepfather kicked him out of his house. "I failed because my
parents abused me because I di dn' t do chores" .
Of the women in their twenties, they had professed different
standards of behavior for their children from what they had been
brought up into. This was particularly evidenced in discussions
with those who had daughters. Such attitudes encouraged further
education, and greater discussion of sexuality at home.
Mariam, 32: For her daughter, she says that she doesn' t want
her to stay at home, "in the old system, girls would stop at

standard 7 (which is what she attained), but now they must
complete Form III·"l will let her go to the level she feels
like".
Monica, 21: She told me her husband frequents bar, and often
1s drunk "How many friends calling him" He "is faithful she
says, but he won' t change"
She told me "I don' t want my
mother' s life"
so she has remained married.
'
In choosing their spouses, both men and women most frequently
listed the criteria that they be caring, loving, kind polite and
good. Women noted that their spouses out to be financial stability
before conmli tting to matrimony.
Circumcision then and now

Circumcision for all the ethnic groups 111 Keny~ except for
the Luos marks the individual' s initiation into adulthood.
Anthropological accounts mention both the corporal and mental
transformations which occur during these rites. The crucial
elements manifest during these rites boil down to strengthening
peer solidarity, receiving from the elders sexual knowledge, and
the youth' s outlined responsibilities according to their
community' s gender norms.
According to sociological studies by the Royal African
Society, indigenous Kikuyu education took place in gender
segregated lodges, with the acquisition of knowledge cal.ibrated to
the age and needs of the youth. Otherwise, "since knowledge was,
amongst the Kikuyu, almost entirely confined either to practical
or to social matters there was no need of theory or of formal
schooling" (McGlashan, 1964; 54). One acquired knowledge in
observing one' s seniors, "much the same as an old-fashioned
apprenticeship" (McGlashan, 1964; 54). Explicit dissemination

took place through mother' s stories, told to children for their
moral content. In these representations of local customs,
anthropologists saw that as parents taught their children the
order of things, they produced progeny that " [ ··· J were happy,
uninhibited and carefree .. ·" (McGlashan, 1964; 55). Formal
instruction was implanted at the time of initiation and marriage.
For men, the participation in the lodges required certain gestural
salutations before prohibitions and customs were articulated. In
particular, the reversal of taboos if trespassed, instructions and
permissions for love-making were prescribed. During initiation,
young women and men would be allowed " [ .. , J heavy petting and
secondly a form of mutual masturbation" (McGlashan, 1964; 55). In
addition to knowledge men acquired, their instruction stressed
their "rights, and indeed duties of a wife to refuse her husband
at certain times, since she too would become ritually unclean by
accepting him. (McGlashan, 1964; 56). Later in their adulthood,
distinguished men could acquire more formal education if they were
chosen to join the circle of elders.
McGlashan' s work falls squarely with majority of
anthropological knowledge on initiation elating to early colonial
penetration, whereas few authors have made note of any processes
of hybridization or erasure impacting these rites in the
globalized postcolony. From our findings, it appeared that not
only Kikuyu initiation rites, but the general trend in
circumcision 1s moving towards medicalization. Undertaking male
circumcision 1n the hospital has ensured but its
institutionalization has caused the mental transformations
previously integral to these rites to disappear. There is no
longer any sexual education taking place simultaneous to the
surgical procedure .. Moreover, female initiation practices were

considered outdated in all of my informants views, although it 1s
still practiced in the rural Samburu and certain Masaii
communities. On account of this gendered asymmetry shaping
initiation practice, students in focus groups primarily defined
manhood by a superficial change to the genitalia, whereas they
defined womanhood relative to marital status, the degree of care
taken in the household and her fertility.
Janet, 29 retold her experience she was eight years old. For
her "they select one part". As for why she thought it was done,
"I heard that it stops the girl from having sex ... It' s part of
culture, others are doing it" . However, "in this generation
can' t think of doing that" . For her son, when he 1s a teenager
he will be circumcised, "that' s when he' s adult" .
May, 20: "Girls can' t get it done at the hospital because
of disease" As for her son, he will get it done at the
I1osp1. ta 1 " . I asked if he would learn about sex during that time,
she said no.
James, 18: After he finished class 8, he was circumcised.
Why? "Tradition, it is a must, if I didn' t happen, they could
hit you, those Kikuyu, they are dangerous"
Kenneth, 22 explained circumcision as making him "brave and
mature" . At the age of 16, at home "in the bush" or the low
plains of the savannah, a "doctor" did it for him. "It teaches
how to be responsible, respect elders, respect initiation···With 20
other boys, we did hunting and cultivating". His mother was also
circumcised, and he noted that "when she grow up, [she] made a
goo d w1"±'e " .

Social Location of HIV in Githogoro

· With the exception of the discussion on the changes that have
altered circumcision practices, we have laid out the collective
imagination and experience with HIV and sexuality.
Certain norms stand out from these empirical findings that
can be extended to reconstruct an ideological position which
(partly) structures health and sexuality in the social imagination
of Githogoro residents.
Clearly, there is a governing secrecy over youth sexuality
produced by intergenerational barriers to c01mnunication. Sexuality
for youth is verbally packaged as a threat, or can tangibly bring
about the execution of a looming threat. While two sided
discussion about sexuality is largely accepted as positive,
households members do not always appoint themselves to do so for
fear of undermining gendered roles and hierarchies of power. With
the medicalization of circumcision, generational patterns for
sexual education fade away. The workplace and school prove to be
most fecund site for heterosocial meeting and romance. However,
the commons or the shared communal space is treated as a residual
affect, occupied by the liminal and amoral tendencies of human
life. Unsafe sex and HIV are the result of environmental factors,
such as loitering, voyeurism, "careless parents" impacting the
individual' s actions, and resulting in "bad behavior". Poverty
makes "bad behavior" more prevalent, but the individual still
retains control over her health risks. In contrast, safe sex is
normatively defined not only by fulfilling standards of behavioral
but also by one' s structural position.
What also stands out is the lack of control intimated in my
informants' discourse. HIV merely emblematized many other risk

and challenges present 1n the lived experience for Githogoro' s
residents. As such, it did not figure as the primary concern of
parents or cormnunity members for their youth. Rather, parents
concerned themselves with ensuring proper schooling, delegating
household chores, and insisting on their standards for appropriate
behavior, enforced through corporal discipline. HIV was treated as
symptomatic of larger problem, the scale of which trumped
discussion based solution.
Being healthy was not isolated from being well positioned in
society. Tho ideology determining this belief local to Githogoro
agrees with the orthodox ideology framing international health
agencies analyses of health. Both structures of knowledge- power
approach health from a holistic vantage point conceiving the
agent' s risk to HIV as the mediation of structural (political
economy), cultural, and individual forces.
Households tended to look to the church and the school as
Lhei r support, and expected that they carry most, if not an
essential role in carrying out the full scale of prevention.
Admittedly, they held that professional relationships entertained
between the teacher and student circumvented the arising
discomfort during family conversations about sexuality. In
addition, the teachers' cultural capital, in the form of
institutional accreditation, bestowed more justifiable claims lo
accomplishing the task than their incomplete certifications.

YOUTH AT THE NEXUS
[A]rguments have flourished at all levels of social life
largely because of the ability of discourses of youth to address
issues at the heart of the social imaginary-··Not only does youth

index immediate sets of social relationships, but its indexical
power shifts discourse into the domain of the metasocial as well
(Durham, 2004; 590).
From the myth of HIV, we see the deposits it has made on to
the social imagination of youth, agency and sexuality. If we are
to take the tenets of participatory grassroots development
seriously, ethnographic reconstructions of the meta-social 1s the
only way to know where our next step towards HIV prevention should
be directed.
What has curious been laid patent is a greater local
acknowledgement of structural and material factors conditioning
risk than acknowledge by the experts from Global Health
Initiative. This falls in line with the many depoliticizing
symptoms of Ferguson' s anti-politics machine. Although there 1s
no doubt that poverty is the main explanatory variable for
disease, the Global Health Industry fails to streamline poverty
alleviation with prevention programs. The school on the other hand
conditions disciplined students in order to acquire their only
hope for social mobility.
Heavy moralist stance at home is not enforced by the same
regime of discipline explicitly rationalizing all activities
conducted in the school' s social space. The silence between
parents and their youth, should not be read as lack of
communication, as the Global Health Industry assumes. Rather, it
is way of placing an expectation of behavior whose delivery
replicates the message' s content itself- a message of respect and
purity communicates its own virtue. Still it is visible from tho
responses that a shift is occurring in the way older youth wish to
handle HIV AIDS. The transforming attitudes towards household

discussions of sexuality points to the "fresh contact' only made
possible by the youth. What he means by this are the procedures
of social reproduction carried out by the youth, since they are
the ones who must select, discard from the old and generate the
new to produce new sets of social interactions, and its norms.
(Cole, 2004; 575, Mannheim 1972; 294) .This attempt to hone in on
the youth at the nexus of prevention efforts, on the verge of
their fresh contact unties the neatly packed fictions that have
unleashed the simulation of moral panic only to show that the
universal and ahistoric conditions of disease and poverty do not
beg for decontextualized solutions.

Bibliography
Althusser, Louis, "Ideology and Idea.logical Apparatus: Notes
Towards In vostiga tion '', trans. Ben Brewster in "Lenin and Philosophy
and Other Essays" , Month.ly Roviow Pross 19, 1970
http://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/althusser/1970/ideology.htm
Baudrillard, Jean, "Simulacra and Simulations" in Jean
Baudrillard, Selected Writings, ed. Mark Poster, pp. 166-181, Stanford;
Stanford University Press, 1988.
http://www. stanford. edu/dept/HPS/Baudrillard/Baudrillard Simulacra.html
Bhattacharjee, Parinita,

"Stepping Stones- a participatory tool

to integrate gender into HIV/AIDS work" . Development in Practice 10, 5.
(2000) : 691 694.
Bourdieu, P. Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge:Cambridge
Universiy Press, 1977

Briggs, Charles, Learning How to Ask,Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1986.
Caldwell, John et al. 1989.
"The Social Context of AIDS in SubSaharan Africa." In Population & Development Review, 15(2): 185-23 11.
Campbell, Catherine and Mzaidume Zodwa. "Grassroots
Participation, Peer Education and HIV prevention by Sex Workers 111 South
Africa", American Journal of Public Health 91, 12 (2001): 1978-1988.
Campbell, Catherine; Foulis, Carol-Ann. "Creating Contexts that
support youth-led HIV prevention in schools", Society in Transit.ion
33,3 (2002): 312- 226.
Campbell, Catherine and MacPhail, Catherine, " Peer Education,
gender and the development of critical consciousness: participatory HIV
prevention by South African youth" Social Science and Medicine 55
(2002) : 331-345.
Campbell, Catherine, Foulis, C.A, Maimane, S. and Sibiya, Z.
"The impact of social environments on the effectiveness of youth HIV
prevention: A South African case study" , AIDS Care Volume 4: 471-478.
Cohen, Sylvie I. Preventing HIV/AIDS among adolescents through
integrated Communication programming. UNFPA. www.unfpa.org. Accessed
December 1st 2005.
Critchley, Simon. "Democracy and Disappointment: Alain
Badiou/Simon Critchley on the Politics of Resistance" Speech Presented
at Slought Foundation, November 15 2007, in Philadelphia, USA.
Durham, Deborah,

"Youth and the Social Imagination" ,
Africa. Anthropological QuaTterl_v 73, 3 (2000): 113-120
Durham, Deborah," Disappearing youth: Youth as a social shifter in
Botswana" , A111erican Anthropologist 31, 4 (2004): 589 - 605.

Fanon, Frantz, The Wretched of the Earth, trans. C. Farrington.
New York: Grove Weidenfcld, 1991.
Ferguson, James, Tho Anti-Politics A1achine. Minneapolis:
University of Michigan Press, 1991.
Ferguson, James, Global Shadows: Africa in the Neo-Liberal World
Order, Chapel Hill: Duke University Press, 2007
Foucault, Michel.

"Afterword: The Subject and Power" in
Foucault: Beyond Structuralism and Henlleneuti cs, Henry Dreyfus and Paul
Rabinow, 208-228. London; Harvester Wheatheaf, 1983
Foucault, M. History of Sexuality: An Introduction,Routeledge,
2001

Freud, Sigmund, Psychopathology of Everyday Life, New York:
Norton, 1966
Friere, P. Pedagogy of the Oppressed. Routledge, 1993.
Green, LW, "Health Education' s Contribution to Public Health in
the Twentieth Century: A Glimpse Through Health Promotion' s Rear- View
Mirror" , Annual Review of Public Heal th 20 (1999) : 67-88.
Green LW; George MA; Daniel M, Frankish CJ, Herbert CJ, Bowie WR,
et al., Study of participatory research in health promotion, Ottawa:
Royal Society of Canada, 1991.
Glik, Deborah; Nowak, Glen; Valente, Thomas; Sapsis, Karena;
Martin, Chad. "Youth Performing Arts Entertainment-Education for
HIV /AIDS Prevention and Heal th Promotion: Practice and Research" .
Jounwl of Health Co1mm111ication 7, 1 (2002) :39 -57

Gn1er, Elliot L. ; L., Farrow K., Henderson A., Cowan, L.,
"Theater in AIDS education- a controlled study" . AIDS Care 8, 3,
(1996): 321-340.

Halstead ]. , Reiss M.

Values

111

Sex Education FTom principles to

pTactice. London: RoutledgeFalmer, 2003.
Hardt, Micheal and Negri, Toni. Empire. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 2000.
Haydon, G.

"Thick or thin? The cognitive content of moral

education 1n a plural democracy" . Journal of Moral Education. 21(10, 5364, 1995.
Illich, Ivan. Deschoo]ing society. New York; Harper & Row, 1972.
Iyaniwura CA.

"Perspective of adolescent reproductive health

behaviour in a suburban town in Nigeria Niger"

Journal of

Medicine

15, 3 (2006): 255-9.
Kenyatta, Jomo, Facing Mount Kenya, Nairobi: Vintage Books. 1962
Kelly, G.

"The relation between Colonial and Metropolitan

Schools: A structural Analysis" . Comparative Education 15, 2: 1979.
Laclau, Ernesto and Mouffe Chantal, Hegemony and Socialist

Strategy, Paris: Verso, 1985.
Lewis, Oscar. "The Culture of Poverty". Society 25, 2 (1998): 711.

Mahala, Richard; Allen, Karen B,

"Participatory action research

on HIV/AIDS through a popular theatre approach in Tanzania", Evaluation

and ProgTam Planning 25 (2002) : 333 - 339.
Matthews, M. The Marxist Theory of Schooling. London: Routledge
and Kegan Paul, 1980.

Mahmood, Sabah, "Feminist Theory, Embodiment, and the
Docile Agent: Some Reflections on theEgyptian Islamic Revival" , Cultural
Anthropology 16, 2, (2001) :202 - 236.

McGlashan, N.,
( 1964): 47-54

"Indigenous Kikuyu Education" . African Affairs 63

Mbernbe, Achille,

"Necropolitics"

Trans. Libby Meintjes. Public

Culture. 5 vol. 1 (2003) : 11 - 40.
Prazak, Miroslava,
of Sexuality

111

Tajfcl, II.

"Talking about Sex: Contemporary Construction

Rural Kenya" . Africa Today (2001) : 84-96.
(1981). Human groups and social categories. Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press.
Robbins, Steven,

"From "Rights"

to

"Ritual" : AIDS Activism

111

South Africa". American Anthropo.log.ist 108, 2; 312-323.
Visser, Maretha J; Schoeman, Johan B. Implementing A Community
Intervention to Reduce Young People' s Risk for Getting HIV: Unraveling
the complexities. Journal of Community Psychology, Vol. 32, No. 2, 2004.

145- 165.

Education and Politics in Tropical Africa, ed. Victor C. Uchendu,
Edison, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1979
Wagener, Judi th R.,

"The Construction of the Body Through Sex

Education Discourse Practices' , in Foucault' s Challenge Discourse,

Know] edge and Power in Educ at ion, ed. Popkewi tz, Thomas R. , Brennan
Marie, New York: Teacher' s College Press, 1998.

Willis, Paul. Learning to Labor: How working class kids get
working class jobs, New York: Columbia University Press, 1977.
Expanding Access to Information, Education, Counselling and
Services http://www.unfpa.org/adolescents/education.htm
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), Practical
Guidelines for Intensifying HIV Prevention:, Towards Universal Access,

Geneva Switzerland:UNAIDS, 2007, Accessed March 23 2008
UNESCO. Basic Education Indicators: Kenya, 2006.
http://www. education.nairobiunesco. org/ index. php?option=com content&task=view&icl~l 9119&1 temicl~l 68.
Accessed March 10'" 2008
UNAIDS, Report on the Global HIV/AIDS Epidemic: July 2002. Geneva:
UNAIDS
WHO, Count1:v Health System Fact Sheet 2006
http://www. afro.who. int/home/countries/fact sheets/kenya.pdf, Accessed
March 23 2008
World Youth Report. UN.
http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unyin/wpayaids.htmt1WYR2005. November
16th 2005
Youth Participation and Youth-Adult Partnership. UNFPA
http://www.unfpa.org/adolescents/participation.htm. November 3 2005.

Elaborating upon Ferdinand de Saussure' s seminal work in which he
distinguished the signifier ( "Human Immunodeficiency Virus" ), the signified (a
retrovirus), and their functional bridge, the integrating linguistic sign (HIV),
Barthes' work superimposes a second semiotic system, the meta-language or the
language through which we speak of the first (Baiihes, 1957; 222). The metalanguage' s system appropriates the linguistic sign as its signifier. The metalanguage functions by appropriating the original linguistic product. In this way, the
signifier becomes a "language object" which allows the myth to preserves the
original concept on top of which another concept is layered. This superimposed
meaning veritably expresses the intentions of authorship, or the context in which
the sign is cited. In other words, the myth exists when the language object
references not only the original concept but also can-ies the weight of the signified
concept at a particular juncture in time and space. The myth generates
signification, furnishing a social meaning and subjective purpose to the original
signified concept. In our case, the myth is fanned when the term HIV is abstracted
from its historical specificity: instead, when invoked, the very term conjures the
nebulous collective of elicited representations. The same term, but serving as a
myth, now also speaks about itself as a fixture in our collective consciousness.
Each instance in which buzz words such as HIV appear, there is a myth because at
that instance the tenn expresses the imagined relationship between the originally
and linguistically signified concept and the ways in which it has been spoken
about.
i

Please refer to Morrison-Beedy D, Carey MP, Aronowitz T, Mkandawire L, Dyne J.
Adolescents' input on the development of an HIV risk reduction intervention. .J
Assoc Nurses AIDS Care. Jan-Feb; 13(1):21-7, 2002.
ii

During my time there, most of the graduating youth from Cheleta, scoring more
that 200/500 on the J(CPE made their way to harambee schools (literally in
Swahili- pulling together; in this case locally funded). On average 20 students
would not make it to secondary school, close to 40% of the class, in line with the
national transition average (UNESCO Nairobi, 2006; 23).
iii

