Anthropology Senior Theses

University of Pennsylvania

ScholarlyCommons
Department of Anthropology

Spring 2007

Between the Sword and the Wall: Inca and Modern Peruvian State
Strategies of Control in Pomatambo-Vilcashuaman
Di Hu
University of Pennsylvania

Follow this and additional works at: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses

Q

Part of the Anthropology Commons

Recommended Citation
Hu, Di, "Between the Sword and the Wall: Inca and Modern Peruvian State Strategies of Control in
Pomatambo-Vilcashuaman" (2007). Anthropology Senior Theses. Paper 88.

This paper is posted at ScholarlyCommons. https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/88
For more information, please contact repository@pobox.upenn.edu.

Between the Sword and the Wall: Inca and Modern Peruvian State Strategies of
Control in Pomatambo-Vilcashuaman
Disciplines
Anthropology

This thesis or dissertation is available at ScholarlyCommons: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/88

BETWEEN THE SWORD AND THE
WALL: INCA AND MODERN PERUVIAN
STATE STRATEGIES OF CONTROL IN
POMATAMBO-VILCASHUAMAN.

I,

DiHu
Senior Thesis
Spring 2Q07

Cover: Guaman Poma de Ayala depiction of Inca siege and Miguel Det's comic depiction of Montesinos bribin~-.
~<,..
.~·.,.,;;,congressman.
_,,

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
First of all, I would like to thank Dr. Paula Sabloff for being a very patient
advisor. I have been working with her since my freshman year and since spring of Junior
year for my thesis. She has been central in my academic development and for that, I am
very thankful. Never was she discouraging, but only skeptical (as she had every reason
to be) about the high ambitions of my thesis. She continually engaged me in the
theoretical framing of the thesis. I am not sure how many countless hours she spent on
my thesis, but I am sure it was more time-intensive than one or maybe even two classes.
I would also like to thank Dr. Clark Erickson for his help on the ancient Andean
side of the research. His continual advice cemented my interest in the Andes. His classes
were very informative, and many of the conclusions of the thesis owed to the analyses
done in class. Furthermore, I would not have noticed certain alignments of ancient sites
without his suggestions.
The people of Pomatambo have been so kind to me these past few years, allowing
me to talk to them and participate in their fiestas. I have never received such hospitality
from any other city or village before. I would especially like to thank Quintin for getting
me acquainted with the village and for persistently looking for ways to improve
Pomatambo. I would like to thank Roberta for giving me baked maize and such a good
interview. I would also like to thank Alejandra for letting me try her sling.
I would especially like to thank Sekov Canchari for being a wonderful research
assistant, often doing more than he needed to help with my research. I would like to
thank his family, the Castillo family, for first introducing me to Pomatambo and
Vilcashuaman and hosting me on numerous occasions. Special thanks go out to Oscar,
Fanny, Luis, Eddy, and Sayyid. I would especially like to express my appreciation to
Aquillina Vilchez. You raised so many wonderful children and have been through so
much, yet your spirit is not dampened. You all have made my stay in Peru a wonderful
expenence.
I would like to thank the NSF-REU Native Voices program for providing the
funding needed to do the research. I would like to thank Dr. Janet Monge and Gerianne
Kaufmann for helping me with the administrative details.
My roommate, Elaine, has been continually supportive of me these past two
years: editing, cooking, cleaning, and being such a wonderful friend for me. I certainly
would not have had so much energy to do my thesis without her tireless spirit.
Last but not least, I would like to thank Adam for a wonderful past three years. I
never lost hope on such an unwieldy project because of you. In fact, you have helped me
with all my unwieldy projects, continually encouraging me.

Table of Contents
Chapter 1: Introduction, the Wall ............................................................... !
Research goals ...................................................................................... 3
Theoretical Considerations ...................................................................... 3
Why Study Pomatambo? ................................................................................................ 5
Background ......................................................................................... 6
Methodology ........................................................................................ 9
Outline of Research .............................................................................. 13

Chapter 2: The Sword, Inca Conquest ofVilcashuaman .............................. 14
The Pre-Inca World ................................................................................ 17
The Inca World ................................................................................... .30

Chapter 3: Down and Out from the Pucaras: Inca State Strategies of Control
in Pomatambo-Vilcashuaman ........................................................... 39
Settlements ........................................................................................ .40
Fortifications ...................................................................................... .48
Roads ................................................................................................ 55
Religion ............................................................................................. 65
Discussion of strategies of control in Vilcashuaman-Pomatambo ...................... 69

Chapter 4: Between the Sword and the Wall: Modern Peruvian State
Strategies of Control in Pomatambo-Vilcashuaman (1980-Present) ..... 73
Purpose ............................................................................................. 74
Origins .............................................................................................. 74
Strategies of state control in Pomatambo-Vilcashuaman ................................. 78
First Vision ......................................................................................... 96
Second Vision ...................................................................................... 99

Chapter 5: Pomatamban Responses and Trends ........................................ 104
Poma tam ban Responses ........................................................................ 104
Conclusion ......................................................................................... 113

Chapter 6: Conclusion ...................................................... .................... 116
Similarities ......................................................................................... 117
Differences ......................................................................................... 118
Implications ....................................................................................... 122

Bibliography
Appendices 1,2,3

Chapter 1

INTRODUCTION: THE WALL
A gigantic Inca wall stands in Pomatambo. Once intimidating and awesome, the wall is
now a curiosity to passers-by and quarry for gravestones. The area surrounding the stones
experienced much violence and upheaval in past half a millennium. Through it all, the stones
stood and silently watched.
Here we begin the story of Pomatambo. A humble village of about two hundred people,
it is situated 3,500 meters above sea level in the province ofVilcashuaman in the south central
highlands of Peru. In the morning, the mist shrouds the tall mountains around Pomatambo.
"Pomatambo" is the hispanicized pronunciation of the Quechua "Pumatampu." "Pumatampu"
means "Puma resting place" or "Puma wayside station." The "tampu" system consisted of an
extensive road network used by the Incas.
Coming into Pomatambo, one sees the main road beautifully paved with river stones of
pink and blue. It took four months for the villagers to pave the 250 feet stretch of road. The
stones were meticulously hauled from the Pampas River five miles away, and one mile down.
The main street is lined on both sides by adobe houses, some of them whitewashed. Continuing
on the main road, one comes to the comer of the plaza, a trapezoidal raised flat space of about
150 feet on each side. The church used to be on the plaza, but was tom down a year ago to make
a new one. In the place of the old church is a gaping hole where the villagers have mined to
make adobe bricks for the new church. There is no electricity in the village, and the government
supplied potable water only a few years ago.

1

Pomatambo seems like any other highland Andean village: agricultural and quiet.

For

most of the day, the village is deserted except for a few chickens and hairy pigs milling about.
One begins to wonder whether it had a notable past at all. However, with even a cursory
inspection, one begins to umavel the many layers of its turbulent history. The plaza is situated at
the end of a large rocky mound. This mound was an ancient cemetery dating to before the Incas.

It fell into disuse after the Inca conquered the area. One can see on the surface many stone tools,
pieces of pottery, and occasionally, bits of human bone, especially after the rains. On the
mound, there is a covered-up cave. The locals covered the cave during the Shining Path violence
in the 1980s in fear of the army "disappearing" people into it. The locals call the mound "Aya
Orqo", which means "Hill of the dead" in Quechua. The signs of the cycles of peace, violence,
decline, and abandomnent are everywhere in Pomatambo.
Throughout its long history, the people of Pomatambo and its surrounding areas have
fotmd themselves caught between different groups in violent conflict. These groups, whether it
is the Incas or the Chankas, the modem Peruvian state or the Shining Path, had different
political-geographical strategies of control.
In my thesis, I would like to compare the different methods of control employed by the
Inca and the modern Peruvian state in Pomatambo and its surrounding area. My thesis will
examine how the state related to the peasant populations of the periphery in the two time periods.
I am comparing how the states suppressed uprisings, how they integrated smaller polities, and
how they used military and economic methods to control the population of the PomatamboVilcashuaman area. Specifically, I am comparing the Inca conquest and colonization of the area
with how the modem state of Peru defeated the Shining Path and pacified the area. I will
examine the political, economic, and military policies used by both entities in response to the

2

challenges of pacifying rebellions. Because the Vilcashuaman region has a long history of
rebellion dating back to pre-Inca times, the physical signs of state control, ancient and modern,
abound in the area. A comparison of state strategies of control reveals much about the
relationship between the nature of the two states and the types of political-geographical policies
they pursued. How did each use physical geography to control the populace? How did the state
alter the social landscapes to their economic and strategic benefit in the two periods?
Research goals
Primarily, I am comparing the different political, military, and geographical
manifestations of control in the Pomatambo-Vilcashuarnan area. What similarities and
differences exist between the Inca and the modern Peruvian state strategies of control in
Pomatambo and its surrounding area? After the comparison, one could begin to give possible
reasons for the similarities and differences. What do the different strategies reveal about the
interaction between goals of the state and the role of the community? I would like to argue that
the different state strategies of control depend on three main factors: the history of state presence
in the Vilcashuaman area before the rebellions, technology limiting or furthering state capacity,
and the economic base of the state.

Theoretical Considerations

Located at the intersection of two Inca roads, Pomatarnbo is also at a crossroad between
the past and the present. With its long history, Pomatarnbo is a microcosm of the changing ways
the state interacted with local communities. Because topography can be considered a relatively
unchanging factor, Pomatambo and its surroundings lend themselves to a comparison of the state

3

strategies of control between the Inca and modern Peru. Any similarities or differences would
derive from the different decision-making strategies and changes in society.
James Scott in his Seeing like a State remarked that the biggest changes in state-society
relations accompanying modernity were the magnitude of the plans for the wholesale
transformation of society and the deeply-penetrating capacity of the instruments of statecraft:
censuses, cadastral maps, identity cards, statistical bureaus, schools, mass media, and internal
security apparatuses. With these advances in technology, the modern state could take its
schemes of standardization and increasing state capacity further along that road than ever before
(Scott 1998: 343). To control the populace, the state has historically tried to make society more
"legible" or organized for easy state intervention. However, the legibility projects before the
industrial revolution had not been very successful. The technological advances allowed certain
states to reach more deeply into people's lives than ever before. How do these technological
advances affect the decision-making strategies of the state?
Furthermore, the Inca and the modern nation-state are very different. Individuals in premodern societies, the Andean societies included, had multiple rights, obligations, allegiance, and
memberships in their local village and lineage community and in the kingdom-wide institutions
of the king, the state's religious and military establishments (Dalton 1980). The modern nationstate, on the other hand, stresses one set of rights, obligations, allegiance, and membership based
on the legal code. There is very little effective overlapping of authority, as the modern nation
state is defined by having a monopoly of legitimate force (Weber 1964: 154). How do the
fundamental differences in society inform the state strategies of control chosen?
Finally, Nugent discusses the importance of including bottom-up or community-initiated
efforts in the traditional oppositional model of state-society relations. The traditional model

4

portrays the local communities as always on the defensive with state-initiated policies of eroding
local identities, autonomy, and self-sufficiency. Nugent shows that often, communities actually
reach out to the state to shape their futures, and that the state and the community are mutually
interdependent. In a system of positive feedback, one creates the other (Nugent 1994). How has
the local populace of Pomatambo-Vilcashuaman interacted with the state to shape the political,
economic, and religious future of the area in the Inca and modern era?

Why Study Pomatambo?

Pomatambo is an ideal case study to explore these themes. Pomatambo as a
concentration of population has a very long history dating back to at least a hundred years before
the Spanish conquest. Therefore, one can compare Inca state strategies of control to modern
Peruvian state strategies with sufficient comparability of units. Pomatambo and its surrounding
area have been extremely important in Peruvian and Latin American history. It was an important
battleground of the Chankas against the Incas, the Incas against the Spaniards, the indigenous
against the Spanish state, and the Shining Path guerillas against the Peruvian state.
Vilcashuaman, six miles away from Pomatambo, was an important political administrative center
for the Chanka, the Inca, and the Spanish.
Pomatambo is also ideal due to the geo-strategic importance of its surrounding area. This
ensured an eventful history of conquest and rebellion. The different ways that different actors
utilized the geographical advantages of the area and tried to control it can be very revealing
about the reasons why they chose different strategies. There have been studies done on Inca
state strategies of control, and there have been studies done on the modern Peruvian state

5

strategies of control. However, as of yet, there has not been a study systematically comparing
the two for a particular area. Therefore, the Pomatambo-Vilcashuaman area is more than ideal to
carry out this comparison.
As Pomatambo is only a case study, the conclusions of this research do not profess to be
universally applicable to all Andean communities. Furthermore, the research does not claim to
treat the types of state policies enacted for Pomatambo in the Inca and modern times as
universal. The Incas were very diverse in how they interacted with different communities and at
different times in the history of the empire. Likewise, the modern Peruvian state's policies can
vary substantially from one Andean village to another.

Background

Ayacucho
The department of Ayacucho is located in the south central sierra of Peru. To the north is
the department of Junin, to the northeast Cuzco, to the east, Apurimac, to the southeast,
Arequipa, to the southwest, lea, and to the west, by Huancavelica. Ayacucho is home to a
variety of microclimates due to its wide range of altitudes. These microclimates fall into three
general categories: tropical forest, mountainous areas, and high-altitude grassy altiplano (Wust
and Coronado 2003: 11 ). Ayacucho has a population of 620,000 people, of which 140,000 live
in the departmental capital of the same name (INEI 2005). Ayacucho is one of the poorest
departments of Peru, with 70% of the population living in poverty, and 35% in extreme poverty
(INEI 2005). For the rural populace of Ayacucho in 1993, potable water was available for only
31 %, and sewage and toilet sanitation facilities were available for only 3% (Wust and Coronado
2003: 34). The 2001 index for human development in Ayacucho averaged around .44, which is

6

very low considering that the rural areas are significantly below this number (Wust and
Coronado 2003: 34).
The combination of extreme backwardness and centuries of armed conflict in Ayacucho
has created a collective consciousness of suffering and millenialist hopes (Montoya 1988: 425).
Perhaps the excerpt from Huamanguino, a poem written by Huamanguino (or Ayacuchano)
Ranulfo Fuentes embodies the sadness and nostalgia that resulted from the Shining Path
violence:
Months and years have passed
Where could he be?
Perhaps under the stony ground
becoming earth
or among the thorns
budding like wild flowers
Soon he will return, he will come back
like rain for the crops
to make the seeds sprout
like the sun at dawn
that makes the flowers bloom.
Vilcashuaman
Vilcashuaman, in which Pomatambo is situated, is one of the poorest provinces of
Ayacucho. Once an important and thriving regional center for the Inca, the province is now one
of the most materially backward in all of Peru. It was the only province in Ayacucho to have no
population growth from 1993 to 2002 (Wust and Coronado 2003: 28). It had the next to lowest
index of development of .425 and the highest rate of illiteracy (44.6 percent in 2000) (Wust and
Coronado 2003: 30-34). In 1993, only 3.3 percent of people in Vilcashuaman had adequate
housing and 32.2 percent had high economic dependency, representing the worst in Ayacucho
(Wust and Coronado 2003: 34).

7

The province is situated in the Pampas river basin 3,000-4,000 meters above sea level.
The terrain is mountainous and sparsely vegetated by eucalyptus trees, shrubs, and short
highland grass. According to agronomist Rosario Perez Liu, Vilcashuarnan has some of the least
agriculturally productive land in Ayacucho (Perez 1988: 523). This is due to a lack of workable
land combined with a harsh climate with frequent droughts and frosts.
The capital ofVilcashuaman province is the town ofVilcashuaman, home to around
6,000 inhabitants. Vilcashuaman was considered the geographic center of the Inca Empire and
was one of the most important regional centers in all of the empire. There are many Inca and
pre-Inca remains in the town. The most notable are the Temple of the Sun and Moon and the
ushnu, a ceremonial step-pyramid once used by Inca royalty.

Pomatambo
Pomatarnbo is a village in the province ofVilcashuaman. It has been self-governing
since the 17'h century but was not officially recognized by the government until the mid 1960s.
Pomatambo has been relatively isolated from the state apparatus until recently. This was mainly
due to the lack of navigable roads. To get to Vilcashuaman, the nearest substantial town, one
had to walk for two and a half hours. More recently, the state has made much more effort to
integrate or change Pomatambo. Contact with the state apparatus has increased in recent years.
In the 1970s, the population approached three hundred. After the violence, the
population declined dramatically to 188. It is now home to around 200-250 people. At one time,
Pomatambo considered itself a potential district capital because it was a hub for neighboring
communities (Webb 1996: 10). The Shining Path violence and demographic decline dampened
these prospects, but the people of Pomatambo have recently made efforts to assume a primary

8

status among its neighboring communities. For example, they have petitioned the local
govermnent to build a high school in Pomatambo, which would elevate the village's status.

Methodology

The data for this research was collected in a one and a half month period in July and
August 2006. My main affiliation was with Ayacucho's Universidad San Cristobal de
Huamanga. The reason I selected Pomatambo to do my field research was because I had already
established connections there in the summer of 2004. I visited there and, through a friend,
befriended a family who had ties to Pomatambo. At that time, a family member was a
Pomatambo schoolteacher. This connection with the Castillo family proved immensely helpful,
as one of the members, Sergio Sekov Canchari Castillo, an UNSCH student, became our
research assistant. Because the majority of the residents in Pomatambo could not speak Spanish
fluently enough to answer the type of questions I wanted to ask, my research assistant, Sekov,
proved invaluable as a translator and survey administrator. However, he had another project in
the Peruvian Amazon in the north of Peru, so he was unable to join us for the whole time. My
friend who initially introduced me to Pomatambo is fluent in Spanish and was with me the time I
was in Peru. His fluency in Spanish greatly aided the administration of my surveys.
Collection of the data involved four steps. The first part entailed going to the library at
the Universidad San Cristobal de Huamanga in Ayacucho and collecting relevant data
concerning the history, culture, and demographics of the Vilcashuaman region. The library had
many archaeology and anthropology theses written by UN SCH undergraduates and graduate
students. The wealth of unpublished ethnographic and archaeological data at the library is very
helpful for any researcher interested in Andean communities in Ayacucho. At the library, I
collected specifically the information about the archaeological remains in Vilcashuaman

9

province, ethnographic data ofVilcashuaman province and Pomatambo, and demographic data
on Vilcashuaman province. The university officials and librarians were extremely helpful and
enthusiastic, and I was able to collect over ten sources for my research.
The second part of the data collection was carried out in Vilcashuaman, the provincial
capital of the province with the same name. Vilcashuaman served as my base of operations. I
observed daily life, interviewed public officials, and explored archaeological remains. The
bureaucracy in Vilcashuaman was a bit difficult to maneuver in. For even very simple
information, such as the population of Pomatambo, we were referred to many different people in
Vilcashuaman, and eventually had to get the information in Ayacucho, only to find out that they
did not have accurate numbers. Furthermore, internal politics in Vilcashuaman sometimes
impeded our interviews, making it difficult to find certain people.
At Vilcashuaman, we interviewed the mayor, the former governor, the police, and the
education coordinator. In addition to interviewing officials, we explored Vilcashuaman
thoroughly, including the outskirts. We often talked with the locals. This gave us a more salient
picture of life here.
The third part ofmy research was done in Pomatambo. I commuted to Pomatambo daily
to do ethnographic research. There, I observed and participated in daily life and conducted
surveys and interviews. The schoolteacher of the village held a village meeting a few days after
we arrived. He explained to the village authorities and villagers who we were and urged them to
be welcoming to us. We explained our projects, and the schoolteacher translated into Quechua
what we said for the villagers who did not have a strong grasp of Spanish. They were very
hospitable and one invited us to a lunch of potatoes after the presentation.

10

Finding people to interview, however, had its difficulties. The villagers felt
uncomfortable when asked for interviews. This was especially true when they were alone.
Because the schoolteacher needed to teach each day, and was often away attending education or
political meetings, he was not present most of the time to introduce us to the villagers.
Furthermore, even when the villagers were willing to be interviewed, they went to work too early
and came back from work too late. They would go out to work around 7:30 to 8:00 in the
morning. In order to arrive before they went to work, we needed to wake up at 5:30. Even when
we did get there early enough, the villagers were very eager to get to work, and we often had to
do hurried interviews. We could not wait until they came back from work around six because it
would already be dark by then. It would make them feel uncomfortable to be singled out from
among the group. Concerning the work schedules of the villagers, we figured out that in order to
interview the people we wanted, it was easier to set up an appointment with them. However, this
method only allowed us to interview members who could speak and understand Spanish
reasonably well. As a result, our early interviews and surveys were mostly of male villagers, as
the female villagers mainly spoke Quechua. When our research assistant, Sekov, arrived, we
were able to do interviews with the women and men of the village who did not feel confident
enough with their Spanish.
For those who stayed in the village to work, we found that it was nearly impossible to
interview them separately as they worked together. In such cases, we did group interviews,
which were very revealing about how the community thought about certain issues. Group
interviews also allowed us a glimpse into the daily life of the villagers. One group interview was
done after the group finished castrating a group of unfortunate pigs. Participating in their daily
life gave me a much more vivid understanding of village life than isolated individual interviews.

11

Furthermore, I did not use a tape recorder because that took away from the extemporaneous
aspect of conversation. The villagers were often much more willing to talk when the
conversation was more casual.
The surveys and interviews were done in a range of settings including the plaza, the
school, people's homes and workplaces, and in the fields. In total, ten interviews and twentythree surveys were done. In addition to the surveys, informal interviewing was done before or
after each survey. Therefore, in total, thirty-three people were either formally or informally
interviewed. The survey informants consisted of sixteen males and eight females. Median age
was 43. The age and education level distributions are summarized in Chart 1. Generally, the
amount of formal education decreases with age. Men tended to have more formal education than
women. Men had an average of7.6 years of education whereas women only had 2.9.

Age vs. Average Education
9

8
7
6

67
Age (years)

77

7887

"

.c

E
~

z

Chart 1: Education in years and corresponding number of informants for each age-group.

The last part of my data collection was to understand the geography around Pomatambo.
This included finding and navigating ancient roads, informally surveying ancient sites, climbing

12

mountains to get a good panorama of the region, and asking the locals about the history of
various sites. When we climbed the mountains around Pomatambo, we had a local curandero
(healer/guide) with us to ensure a safe trip. I used the topographic maps of the area and a GPS
device to help with navigation and map-making. The survey was not systematic due to time
constraints and the nature of the research. My research is not an archaeological survey but rather
an assessment of political geographical facets of Pomatambo and its immediate surroundings
over time. Therefore, informally surveying the most relevant sites sufficed.

Outline of research

In chapter two, I will examine the social and historical contexts of the PomatamboVilcashuaman area before the Inca conquest and the general strategies of control used by the
Incas to conquer and keep peaceful the subject populations. In chapter three, I will show which
strategies of control the Incas used in Pomatambo-Vilcashuaman and how they relate to the
social and geographical world of the local populace. In chapter four, I will examine the rise and
fall of the Shining Path in relation to the Peruvian government's evolution in counterinsurgency
strategies and to the local social and geographical conditions of Pomatambo-Vilcashuaman. In
chapter five, I will examine the social and economic changes that have occurred in the area as a
direct or indirect result of the violence and governmental policies of control. In chapter six, I will
compare the strategies of control employed by the Incas and the Peruvian government for the
Pomatambo-Vilcashuaman area and give reasons for the similarities and differences. I will also
discuss the implications for the future of peasantry given the current trends in governmental
policies and the economy.

13

Chapter 2
THE SWORD: INCA CONQUEST OF VILCASHUAMAN

Introduction
In late July of every year, the town ofVilcashuaman holds a festival called the Vilcas
Raymi. Unlike the more famous Inca Inti Raymi (Q. Inca Sun Festival) in Cuzco, which
commemorates the conquest of the Inca by the Spanish conquistadors, the Vilcas Raymi
commemorates the conquest of the Chankas by the Inca. People from all over Ayacucho throng
to Vilcashuaman to see the drama unfold on top of the old Inca temple of the sun. For one day
every year, the Catholic church, which stands atop the ruins of the Inca temple, is covered by a
gigantic blue flag painted with a sun and a moon, representing the Inca dominion. The terraces
are covered with grass huts. The drama starts with the Chanka women solemnly dancing in line,
slowly filling up the terraces of the Inca temple. Then the Chanka men, equipped with maces,
slings, and shields follow. The flutes, drums, and horns play the same musical phrase over and
over. This particular day in 2006, the sky is cloudy, and it does not bode well for the Chankas.
The Chankas, dressed in brown, go about their usual business, sharing potatoes and
relaxing with one another. Shortly after, the Incas arrive. They send a messenger to proclaim
the might of the Incas and their wish to subdue the Chankas. The Chanlcas, from their elevated
position on the terraces, hurl insults and drive the messenger back. The music changes tune, and
the drums are more emphasized. The Inca army arrives, and the music stops. After a brief
exchange of insults and challenges, the Incas and the Chankas begin to fight. They begin to hurl
stones at one another, and the air is riddled with what sounds like gunfire. Then the Incas storm
the terraces of the temple, and hand-to-hand combat ensues. There is screaming by the women,

14

martial yells by the men, and the steady beating of the drum. The Incas set fire to the huts of the
Chankas, and soon the smoke obscures the whole area. There are people lying prostrate,
representing the Chanlcas killed by the Inca. Soon the Chankas are defeated, the Incas raise their
flags and dance to celebrate their victory. The Inca emperor makes a speech in Quechua, and the
drama ends.
Every year, local students volunteer to put on this drama in Vilcashuaman. Intended or
not, this drama echoes a specific siege of the "Chanka" ethnic groups by the Incas that took place
over five hundred years ago. It took place on a rocky hill called Pilluchu or Qatun Urqu Pata
near Vilcashuaman (Von Hagen 1955). Chroniclers Bernabe Cobo and Pedro Cieza de Le6n
described the famous battle. Guaman Poma de Ayala also drew a depiction of the battle
(Figure 1).

,~.,...
tl,;,~~ 1:t)~~c!~f!/k"J~~.~ '"i~~\!~,~~~~ J.n~~•~/"c{~~~!~,"'y~":":~•marca y
1 0
.: ,

0

112

Figure 1: Incas besieging a fortress. Guaman Poma 1615: 155.

15

In it, the Chankas, Soras, Lucanas, Andamarca, Parinacochas, Pomatambos, and the
Condes ethnic groups have taken refuge on top of a fortress. They are fighting against the Inca
captain, Inca Maitac. According to Cieza de Leon, the Soras people fled there after they were
defeated in a big battle against the Inca. In the words of Cieza:
Those who escaped being killed or taken prisoner returned howling and lamenting to their
village, and removing such of their possessions as they could, and their women, they
abandoned it and took refuge, so it is told, on a high peak close to the Vilcas River, where
around the summit there were many caves and a spring of water. Many men and their
women withdrew to this stronghold, providing themselves with all the supplies they could
gather. And not only the Soras took refuge on this peak, but others from the region of
Huamanga and the Vilcas River an other parts joined them, horrified at the thought that the
Inca wished to make himself sole ruler of people (Cieza de Leon 1959 [1553]: 231).
Cieza de Leon describes the people of the Vilcashuaman area as willful and warlike. Therefore,
it came as no surprise that they lost the siege only because the food supply ran out:
Formerly they were indomitable and so warlike that the Incas had great trouble
conquering them. So much trouble, indeed, that they say that during the reign of
Pachacuti, after he had defeated the Soras and Rucanas, provinces where the people were
sturdy, and which also came under the juridiction of this city, a large force of Indians
fortified themselves on a high cliff, and there were bitter fights before they were
conquered .... For, rather than give up their freedom and become slaves of the tyrant, they
paid no heed to the hunger they underwent and the repeated attacks they suffered.
Whereupon Pachacuti, ambitious to dominate them and eager not to suffer in his
reputation, besieged them and put them to great hardship for over two years, until finally,
after holding out as long as they could, they surrendered to him (Cieza de Leon 1959
[1553]: 129).
Strangely, not all of the people around Vilcashuaman fled to the rocky fortress. While the Soras
and other groups were being besieged atop Pillucho, some locals allied with the Incas:
Returning to the narrative, as the Inca strongly desired to have those who had taken refuge in
the rocks in his power, he marched with his troops until he came to the river of Vilcas 1 . The
inhabitants, when they knew that he was there, came in great numbers to see him and to
perform services, and they established friendship with the Inca. By his order they began to
build great edifices, in the place which we now call Vilcas (Cieza de Leon 1883 [1553]: 150).
To understand this curious fact, one must first examine the pre-Inca past of region and trace it
through the Inca conquest of the area. We will see that the Incas exploited ethnic tensions for
1

Now called the Pampas River.

16

their own benefit. The anecdote also serves as a point of departure for the political geographical
strategies of control employed by the Inca to pacify the region.
In this chapter, I will examine the Inca and pre-Inca history of the area and the state
methods of control as manifested through fortifications, roads, imperial policies towards the local
population, and religious-related sites and practices. In the next chapter, I will compare the
methods of control used in the Vilcashuaman area to the methods of control employed by the
Inca elsewhere. The purpose of this chapter is to understand the reasons behind certain decisions
made by the Inca in controlling the local population and terrain.

The Pre-Inca World
The human landscape of the central highland Late Intermediate Period (LIP) was a
mosaic of multiple ethnic groups organized as chiefdoms. The LIP is the period of time after the
fall of the W ari Empire around 1000 A.D. and before the imperial expansions of the Inca Empire
around 1460 A.D. Chiefdoms are political entities that organize regional populations in the
thousands or tens of thousands. There is a continuum of socio-political complexity and number
of people integrated in chiefdoms. They are "regionally organized societies with a centralized
decision-making hierarchy coordinating activities among several village communities (Earle
1987: 288)." Another way oflooking at chiefdoms is to treat them as polities above the village
level but below the state level.
Settlements and Settlement Patterns
These ethnic groups were located in the present departments ofHuancavelica, Ayacucho,
and Apurimac. Map I shows some of the numerous ethnic groups and their locations.

17

Paucartampu

AncoHuallo

Sora
Aymara

Peru

Lucanas

Kana
Antabamb

Azangaro

Pomatamb

Parinacocha
Chira

Qolla

Collagua

Urcosuyu
Lupaqa

Ubina

·-•-0\

j

i
\

i

I

\_

-~

•.J"akan

··• ...

N

Bolivia
Mo~o

Chunc
~'&,

u:ll
"~
u

·····h;~

••••••,,.,.,•

Cota"

Yurakare

0

500km

\

~~"'

\Karimka

\.

i

/

r/:osuyu

Ch"'

CMrka

UtU

kl'"
/

Yampara

:'

' c.e.f.'1996

l'n.d.1998

Map 1. Ethnic groups of South-Central Sierra. From D' Altroy (2002): 42; Yaranga Valderrama (1995): 251.

There is a bit of uncertainty surrounding the ethnic groups that occupied the Pampas river valley.
According to Gonzalez Carre, this was the principal valley of the Chankas (Gonzalez Carre
1992: 17). However, the Pampas River valley, in which Vilcashuaman is located, also seemed to
be an area settled by several ethnic groups: the Soras, Lucanas, Chankas 2, and the native
2

The Villca, the Chankas that lived in the Vilcashuaman area, were also called the Hancohuallos. Hancohuallo was

their captain in their historical rebellion against the Incas.

18

Tanquihuas. The Tanquihuas were the native inhabitants of the Vilcashuaman area (Carabajal
1965 [1586]: 219). Historian Huertas said that the Chankas conquered the Tanquihuas during
their expansion from Huancavelica (Huertas 1983: X).
Warfare is a general characteristic of chiefdoms (Earle 1987, D' Altroy 1992), and the
settlement patterns and settlement layout of these ethnic groups bear witness to this. Schreiber
described the Late Intermediate settlements of the Lucanas as high-altitude hilltop fortifications.
She said that most sites were in defensible locations and enclosed by a defensive wall. She
speculated that the purpose of these settlements was to serve as temporary refuges in times of
external threat. Therefore, the period following the collapse of the W ari Empire was one of
increased warfare (Schreiber 1987: 274). D' Altroy characterized the settlement patterns of the
Wankas in the Wanka II period (1350-1460 CE) as surrounded by defensive walls and located
higher in altitude. They were located in defensible positions that commanded an amplified view
of the region (D' Altroy 1992: 57-58). Valdez and Vivanco studied the LIP in the Qaracha River
valley, immediately west of the Pampas river basin, where Vilcashuaman is located. They
observed that after the collapse of the Wari, new fortified sites were built in strategic positions at
higher elevations. The location of the sites commanded clear views of the river valley below
(Valdez and Vivanco 1994: 149-151).
These settlement layouts and patterns are not specific to these ethnic groups. Gonzalez
Carre defined "Chanka" as a cultural identification, not a political one. He maintained that the
cultures of some of the ethnic groups of Huancavelica, Ayacucho, and Apurimac shared common
cultural attributes such as religious beliefs, material culture, and settlement patterns (Gonzalez
Carre 1992). In El area hist6rica chanka, Gonzalez Carre et al. compiled all the known
"Chanka" affiliated sites in Huancavelica, Ayacucho, and Apurimac surveyed by previous

19

archaeologists. The pattern of fortifying hilltop sites and circular buildings arranged in chaotic
fashion was widespread in Huancavelica, Ayacucho, and Apurimac (Gonzalez Carre et al. 1987).
These places also shared similar material culture (Gonzalez Carre et al. 1988). This shows that
the social conditions in the south central Andes were somewhat consistent.
Economic and Social Life of the LIP Ethnic Groups
The economic life of the LIP in the department of Ayacucho was characterized by the
twin principles of self-sufficiency and community (Stern 1982: 4). The principle ofselfsufficiency was manifested in what's called the "vertical archipelago" system first described by
John Murra (1972). It is intimately tied to the unique geography of the Andes in which the
alternation of damp and dry, sloping and horizontal, forested and unforested, and the presence or
absence of human planning has created a rich and complex ecological mosaic based on a
succession of tiers that are differentiated from each other by drops in temperature coupled with
the rise in altitude. There are several hundred basic physical units called "geofacies" in the
Andes. This mosaic, because of its complexity and richness, brings about a very large number of
options in the ways to exploit it, some of which the different Andean societies in history have
adopted (Dollfus 1986: 11 ). In this context, the most common form of exploitation of the land is
called the "vertical archipelago" model, where cultures exploit complementary ecologies at
different altitudes.
From an economic vantage point, the dispersal of people over different environmental
pockets limited the effect of crop failures in one or two of the environmental pockets. It also
provided access to a variety of different resources that thrive at different altitudes. By
controlling as many of these environmental pockets as possible, the different groups could
achieve self-sufficiency and not become dependent on barter with other communities. These

20

communities went to great lengths to secure these zones. According to Stern, "Ethnic groups
situated in the Rio Pampas region of Vilcashuaman competed with other communities for warm
coca lands in the northern reaches of Lucanas. The Soras people of eastern Lucanas reached out
well over 100 kilometers to mine salt near Huarnanga to the northwest, and to cultivate aji in hot
coastal lands to the southwest (Stern 1982: 5)."
This led to an interesting political territorial landscape. Instead of being characterized by
clearly defined borders, the landscape looked more like dew-laden webs overlapping with one
another, with each web representing a group or community and the dewdrops representing a
settlement. This would explain the presence of so many ethnic groups in the Vilcashuarnan
region before the Incas. It was, and has always been, a strategic location, centrally situated
between many environmental zones and defended by the wide Pampas River. Having a stake in
this zone was crucial to the economic well-being of any ethnic group.
Divisions within Societies
The divisions within societies can reflect economic or social conditions. For the ethnic
groups of Ayacucho, many were divided into three parts. For example, the Wankas were divided
into the Hanan Wankas (Upper Wankas), the Hurin Wankas (Lower Wankas), and the Xauxa
(D' Altroy 1992: 48). The Lucanas were divided into the Hanan Lucanas, Hurin Lucanas, and the
Andamarca Lucanas (Schreiber 1993). The Soras were divided into the Hanan Soras, Hurin
Soras, and Chalco (Zuidema 1966: 70). The Chankas were divided into the Hanan Chankas,
centered in Andahuaylas, the Hurin Chankas, centered in Uranrnarca, and the Hancohualla or
Villca, centered in Vilcashuarnan (Huertas 1983: IX; Zuidema 1966: 69). The origins of this
curious feature may be found in the myth of the three brothers of Lake Choclococha.

21

The Unifying Myth
The myth explains the relationship between the Wankas, Chankas, and Pokcras and their
origin at Lake Choclococha3 . Navarro de! Aguila summarizes it:
"En los primeros tiempos, cuando el caos reinaba sobre la tierra i los hombres luchaban
entre ellos, quiso Dios que surgieran de la laguna de Chokcllo Kcocha, tres hermanos
dotados de sabidurfa i poder, con el fin de pacificar i civilizar a los hombres que vivfan en
estado de barbarie. No se sabe a punto fijo cuales hayan sido sus nombres; pero, es cierto
que uno de ellos era de complexion atletica, cara redonda, ojos fosforescentes i de
instintos sanguinarios; el segundo, tenfa los ojos vivos i escrutadores, la nariz encorvada i
de agilidad extraordinaria; i el tercero, de cara larga, boca grande, ojos dulces i apacibles,
sagaz y astuto. Se repartieron la tierra en tres partes iguales i tomaron diferentes caminos
en busca de un Ingar apropiado para sentar sus reales; el primero, se estableci6 en la tierra
de los chankas; el segundo, en la de los pokcras; i el tercero en la de los Wankas.
Reinaron muchos afios ensefiando a los hombres las ciencias i las artes i lograron ordenar
el mundo, i una vez terminada su misi6n, el que fuera padre de los Wankas se convirti6
en un perro; el de los pokcras en halc6n; i el de los chankas en le6n. Estos tres animales
se convirtieron en tabu; i desde entonces, los pokcras divinizaron el aguila indiana (el
Waman), los Wankas el perro peruano (el atokc: zorro) i los chankas el le6n andino (el
puma). De hecho se convirtieron en apukuna (dioses mfticos) i se apellidaban: Apu
Waman (dios halc6n), Apu Oskco (dios le6n), i Apu Atokc (dios zorro) (Navarro de!
Aguila 1983 [1939]: 153-154)."
In the beginning, when chaos ruled over the earth and people fought amongst each other,
God wanted to issue forth from Choclococha lake three brothers of wisdom and power,
with the purpose of pacifying and civilizing the people who lived in barbarity. Their
names are not exactly known; however, it is certain that one of them had an athletic build,
round face, phosphorescent eyes and bloodthirsty instincts; the second, had lively and
scrutinizing eyes, a curved nose and had extraordinary agility; and the third, a long face,
big mouth, sweet and gentle eyes, sagacious and astute. They divided the land among
themselves into three equal parts, and they took different paths in the search for an
appropriate place to establish their kingdoms; the first was established in the land of the
Chankas; the second, in the land of the Pokcras; and the third, in the land of the Wankas.
They ruled for many years teaching people the sciences and the arts and managed to put
the world in order. Once finished with their mission, the father of the Wankas turned into
a dog; the father of the Pokcras into a falcon; and the father of the Chankas into a puma.
These three animals turned into totems, and since then, the Pokcras deified the Indian
eagle (the Waman/Huaman), the Wankas the Peruvian dog (the Atokc or fox), and the
Chankas the Andean lion (the Puma). In fact they turned into apukuna (Q. "Lords" or
mythic gods) and were calledApu Waman (Falcon God), Apu Oskco (Puma God), and
Apu Atokc (Fox God). (translation mine)

3

Lake Choclococha (Q. Com Lake) is located in the department ofHuancavelica. It is the source of the Pampas

River.

22

The myth explained how the Wankas settled in Huancavelica, how the Pokcras 4 settled in
Ayacucho, and how the Chankas settled in Andahuaylas. The implications of this myth will be
explained in the next section.
Differing Interpretations ofinter-ethnic Group Relations
There are different interpretations regarding the level of integration and the relationships
these ethnic groups had with one another. The question of how the ethnic groups were related
and how they interacted with each other politically has been the stumbling block of scholars.
The question is unlikely to be resolved solely through historical sources, and only systematic
archaeological work in the future can shed more substantive light on the issue. Perhaps the
earliest attempt to resolve this problem was by Victor Navarro del Aguila.
In his famous dissertation written in 1939, Las Tribus de Ancku Wallokc, he postulated
that there was a grand confederation of the Wankas, Chanlcas, and Pokcras. According to
Navarro del Aguila and his sources, the Chanka captain Ancku Wallokc 5 , led a grand army of
Wankas, Pokcras, and Chankas against the Incas in Cuzco (Navarro del Aguila 1983 [1939]: 23).
To Navarro del Aguila, the three "nations" were politically allied at least to rebel against the
Incas. According to him, the Pokcras occupied the present day Ayacucho provinces of
Huamanga, Huanta, La Mar, Cangallo and Victor Fajardo; the Chankas occupied the present day
provinces of Andahuaylas in Apurimac, and Lucanas and Parinacochas in Ayacucho, and the
Wankas the department ofHuancavelica (Navarro del Aguila 1983 [1939]: 183). Navarro del
4

According to Gonzalez Carre in his Los sefiorfos chankas, there is no archaeological or colonial historical evidence
of the existence of the "Pokcras." It seems, rather, that Navarro de! Aguila and the scholars before him conflated
the Wari with the Pokcras. Taipe Campos affirms this by saying that the concept of the Pokcras was probably
created by Ayacucho intellectuals to project an Ayacucho-Huancavelica regional identity. Nevertheless, the concept
of"Pokcras" is accepted as a proxy for the ancient ethnic groups of the Ayacucho region (195). Interestingly,
Garcilaso de la Vega mentioned that the province ofHuamanga was also known as "Poc'ra (Garcilaso de la Vega

1989 [1609]: 295)." In the Relaciones Geograficas de Indias [1586], Quinua was also known as "Pokra." Quinua is
now the traditional ceramics making center of Ayacucho.
5
Also spelled "Ancohuallo," "Hancohuallo," "Hancohuallu," "Anco Ayllo", "Arco Ayllu," etc.

23

Aguila believed that there was a deep sense of unity between these three nations, as they were
mythical brothers and had similar material culture. Due to these similarities, they were able to
form a confederation, the Chanka confederation, against the Incas. In his thesis, he does not
mention any warfare between these three nations, implying that their relations were highly
integrated and peaceful.
Nestor Taipe Campos in his examination of the myth of the three brothers of
Choclococha arrived at a different interpretation than Navarro de! Aguila. He believed that the
myth, among other purposes, served to facilitate interethnic relations. The geographical space
that the different "nations" occupied all had important rivers that found their source in Lake
Choclococha. However, he does not preclude warfare under "interethnic relations." He says that
wars are also fom1s of inter-human relations that establish alliances, dominions, and conquests
(Taipe Campos 2003: 194). Therefore, the myth served to shape the inter-ethnic activities,
which included war. Its logic also legitimized the alliances and conquests made by these ethnic
groups because the myth elevated these activities to the role of civilizing the barbarians. In my
opinion, perhaps it also served to limit interethnic violence between the three geographical areas.
All the lands with rivers that found their source at Lake Choclococha were in their divine right to
conquer. This would have created pressure for expansion outside of this core area. The
component of brotherhood might have served to limit the constant re-conquest of the core areas
by the same ethnic groups.
Steve Stem believed that inter-ethnic relations were not based on cultural similarity, but
rather on economic needs of a community. He believed that each community tried to sustain
self-sufficiency. Through pursuing this end, the ethnic groups developed a system of relations
that served to help each community. The communities within these groups would try to extend

24

their kinship network, solidifying their access to a variety of microenvironments and their
resources.
According to Stern, the basic kin unit of Andean culture was the ayllu. In general, it is a
kin unit in which all of its members trace their ancestry back to a common ancestor, sometimes a
mythical ancestor. The "extended web of 'household' relatives joined together with other such
groups to make up a larger ayllu (Stern 1982: 6)." The ayllu was more flexible in practice than in
theory. It could simultaneously denote smaller and larger kindreds (ayllus within ayllus), which
allowed strategic exogamous marriages, which in turn might create new ayllus (Stern 1982: 6).
This overlapping network of kin relationships allowed the Andean communities of Ayacucho to
found their identity and means for survival. In Stern's words:
The dispersed fields, pastures, waters, and animals at the disposal of Andean families
belonged not to them as alienated property, but rather to the collective domains of their
ayllus, communities, and ethnic groups. True, each household and ayllu within the
community sought self-sufficiency and direct access to various microenvironments. But
these units existed as dependencies of larger networks rather than as free, independent
entities (6).
Ethnic and community bonds were reinforced in this context of reciprocal exchanges oflabor.
This in turn allowed an extensive network of cooperation, allowing each community, while still
self-sufficient, to reach further outward for distant resources and to engage in collective
endeavors such as irrigation, canal-building, or terracing. Thus, the capacity to mobilize labor
was increased for each community under this system (Stern 1982: 7).
However, this system, while simultaneously creating and expanding society also
generated structural conflicts between the duties to one's closer household relatives or ay/lu, and
the need for cooperation with other ethnic groups and communities in a broader setting capable
of exploiting a broader range of resources. The large and even small ayllus of the Soras and
Lucanas peoples preserved their distinct identities and had different interests. They even spoke

25

differentiated local languages and dialects in addition to the common language of Aymara (Stern
1982:9; Carabajal 1965 [1586];Monz6netal. 1965 [1586]). Thus, whiletheveryendsofselfsufficiency led to equal interchange among relatives the preferred means of economic
cooperation, it also led to conflict between unequal ayllu 'brothers' or households (Stem
1982:9). This reflects the complexity of social relationships within and between ethnic
communities. In other words, they were "thickly" interconnected.
Under this scheme, political authority was decentralized and fragmented because people
were fiercely loyal to their local ayllu relatives (Stern 1982: 12). Stern paints a picture of
continual maneuvering between different autonomous groups, large and small, in a multi-ethnic
setting to maximize each community's access and control of different microenvironments. Thus,
most economic inequality manifested between communities rather than within them, giving
conflict a more ethnic tone. This was very precarious, and the archaeological remains attest to
the continual wars among these groups (Stern 1982: 13).
Peruvian archaeologist Gonzalez Carre gives another interpretation. In the tradition of
Navarro de! Aguila, he calls the Chankas a "nation" which integrated certain ethnic groups of
Ayacucho, Huancavelica, and Apurimac (Gonzalez Carre 1992: 9). His purpose was to see if the
material cultures of the traditional Chanka ethnic groups were the same, which would show a
common identity. However, unlike Navarro de! Aguila, Gonzalez Carre places the unity in the
cultural sphere, not the political or historical. Rather, he argues that the Chanka nation was a
geographical area that shared the same cultural elements such as art, traditions, language, and the
image of the world. He believes that the cultural similarity facilitated the social conduct and
organizational structures of the people of these regions in different historical instances (Gonzalez

26

Carre 1992: 24). Therefore, any alliances would not be indicative of a higher political
organization, but rather the expediencies of historical circumstance.
In his studies, Gonzalez Carre identified four related pottery styles that he attributed to
the "Chanka nation." They are Tanta Orqo, Qachisqo, Arqalla, and Aya Orqo. Tanta Orqo style
is found with Qachisqo and Arqalla. The style is the oldest of the four, and is found in the
department ofHuancavelica and Huanta province of the department of Ayacucho. Qachisqo is
found in Socos Vinchos, Huanta and Tarnbo en Ayacucho and a part ofHuancavelica. Arqalla is
the most popular style and is distributed in Ayacucho, Apurimac, and Huancavelica. Aya Orqo
is very scarce and found in Cangallo, Vilcashuaman, Huarnanga, Tarnbo, and Parinacochas of
Ayacucho, and Andahuaylas of Apurimac. It is found in association with Inka, Qachisqo, and
Tanta Orqo ceramics. It is the youngest of the styles and incorporates some Inka elements
(Gonzalez Carre 1992: 56-60). The interesting pattern that emerged from his studies is the
geographical progression of the related styles from Huancavelica into northern Ayacucho, and
then into southern Ayacucho and Apurimac. This is reminiscent of the historical accounts of the
Chankas originating in Huancavelica and then conquering across Ayacucho and into part of
Apurimac. Cieza de Leon said that the Chankas told him they, like the Xauxa ethnic group,
originated from Lake Choclococha. They conquered eastward until finally conquering the
Quechuas of Andahuaylas and settling it (Cieza de Leon I 959: [1553]: 207). It is also
reminiscent of the myth of the three brothers of Lake Choclococha, lending some historical
credibility to the myth.
Based on these different interpretations, and the help of certain chronicles, the nature of
the relationships between the ethnic groups may lie somewhere between Stern's and Gonzalez
Carre's interpretations, with elements ofTaipe Campos' interpretation of the function of the

27

origin myth. It seems that within each ethnic group, there were smaller groupings or chiefdoms,
which allied or fought with one another in maneuvering to get access to a wide variety of
resources. As society evolved and grew, large territorial domains were created from the linking
of different ayllus, which in turn led to the creation of the ethnic groups. Some of these domains
were very large, as with the Lucanas and Soras, while others were much smaller. As the
societies expanded, there was a need to involve ayllus of other ethnic groups. Thus, three
mythical ayllus, the falcon, dog, and puma, were created to adjust to these changes in society and
encompass ever-growing networks of exchange. The origin myth stressed the common ancestry
of each group, serving the function of making reciprocal labor exchanges or inter-ayllu wars a
family affair. Therefore, economic needs in a geographically remarkable setting led to an
economic system that was deeply intertwined with culture. One served to advance the other and
vice versa in a system of positive feedback. Thus, what characterized the inter-ethnic relations
was neither solely economic nor solely cultural, but both.
While an important first step in this field of research, there are serious shortcomings in
Navarro de! Aguila's thesis. Historian Lorenzo Huertas astutely pointed out that the idea of a
political Chanka confederation had serious problems because the Incas later used the Chankas of
Andahuaylas to defeat ethnic groups that were supposed to be a part of the confederation and
under Chanka hegemony (Huertas 1983: X). This problem was also present in Cieza' s account
of the conquest of the province Vilcas, in which the Soras, Lucanas, and others fought against
the Incas, but at the same time, some of the natives of the area allied with the Incas. However,
under Stern's and Gonzalez Carre's theories, the possibility of warring amongst groups with
similar culture is made possible by political decentralization. The Incas extensively used local
antagonisms for their own ends, and the incorporation of Chanka tribesmen in the Inca army to

28

fight against its distant kinsmen is not antithetical to the theses put forth by Stern and Gonzalez
Carre. According to Pedro de Carabajal's native informants in 1586, the villages of
Vilcashuaman often fought with each other over land before the Inca conquest (Carabajal 1965
[1586]: 207).
Chronicler Garcilaso de la Vega's account is consistent with the views of Stern and
Gonzalez Carre. He says that under the name "Chanka" were included other tribes such as the
Hancohuallu and Villca, Utunsulla (Angaraes), Uramarca, and others (Garcilaso de la Vega 1989
[1609]: 218-219). Although the Incas called all these groups under the collective name of
"Chanka," the tribes under "Chankas" would identify themselves according to their ayllus and
tribes. When the Inca asked them to submit, the leaders of the tribes gathered to discuss the issue
and were divided in two factions. In the words of Garcilaso:
Some said it was right that they should accept the Inca as their lord since he was the child
of the Sun. Others, including the descendants of the lion, said on the contrary that they
should not accept any foreign domination when they themselves were lords of so many
subj eels and children of a lion; they knew their own descent, and did not believe that the
Incas were really descended from the Sun... The Chancas occupied many days in their
dispute, at times tending to submit and at times to resist, without reaching agreement
(233).
It seemed that the descendants of the lions, the Chankas of Andahuaylas and Uramarca, did not

want to submit, having recently conquered the Quechuas. However, according to Garcilaso, the
Inca learned of their debates and quickly mustered an army to the area and threatened to kill all
of them. The Chankas did not have time to muster an army from all the different tribes. Under
these terms, the Chanlcas submitted, but only out of fear. The disagreement showed that the
groups were not unified politically even under the circumstances of being conquered. However,
their forced submission would set the stage for one of the most pivotal events in late preColumbian history.

29

The Inca World
The Inca conquest of Vilcas
The historical data from the different early colonial chronicles differ greatly concerning
which Inca emperor conquered the province ofVilcas 6 . In many of the chronicles, it is either
implicitly or explicitly stated that the area had to be subdued many times over a long period.
However, there does seem to be agreement that the final conquest and pacification of Vilcas
occurred after the famous Chanka rebellion against the Incas, making it one of the first provinces
to be conquered outside of the Inca heartland.
Cieza de Leon said that the Chankas were so brave that they even besieged Cuzco, and
that after their defeat, their captain, Anco Huallo, disdained being under the yoke of the Incas
and fled with some of his tribesmen and settled on the banks ofa lake (Cieza de Leon 1959
[1553]: 131). After this, the Inca Pachacuti conquered the Vilcas region. Garcilaso de la Vega
elaborates by saying that after the Incas subdued the Chanka tribes (including those ofVilcas)
under the threat of annihilation the Chankas conspired to rebel. The tribes Chanka, Utunsulla,
Hancohuallu, Uramarca, and Villca and others of their neighbors rebelled and slew the Inca
governors and royal officials and mustered an army of 30,000 to march against Cuzco. They
chose as their captain general Hancohuallu, twenty-six years old, and the other two commanders
were Tumay Huaraca and Astu Huaraca. The Chankas were narrowly defeated and suffered
heavy casualties (Garcilaso de la Vega 1989 [1609]: 282). The defeat of the Chanka rebellion
marked the turning point in Inca conquest history. The Chankas, according to tradition, were
their most formidable foes. It is after this event that the Incas expanded their empire greatly.

6

This is probably due to the ayllu biases of the native informants. For more information, see (The work about
reading between the lines in the chronicles and comparing the different chronicles.)

30

According to Garcilaso de la Vega, Cieza de Leon, Bernabe Cobo, and Sarmiento de
Gamboa, Hancohuallu survived to eventually escape with a number of his men to the region of
Chachapoyas 7 . After the flight of Hancohuallu, the Inca emperor started a policy called mit 'maq
(Lorandi 1986: 35). It was a policy that transferred whole communities to different parts of the
empire as colonists to further the economic and military ends of the Incas. In the words of
Garcilaso de la Vega:
His first action was to promulgate laws that seemed necessary to prevent the recurrence of
any risings similar to those of the past. To the Chauca provinces he sent people whom they
called migrants. They numbered ten thousand heads of families and were to settle and fill the
places of those who had died in the battle of Yahuarpampa and those who had gone off with
Hancohuallu (303).
In effect, the whole region of Vilcashuama.n and its neighboring areas were violently
depopulated, with the exception of the native Tanquihuas, to make room for the colonists the
Incas transplanted (Gonzalez Carre 1981: 37; Carabajal 1965 (1586]: 219). The Pampas river
basin became an area of over a dozen ethnic groups transplanted from outside by the Inca. This
was a radical departure from the previous state of social relations between the local ethnic groups
and served to make a local society dependent on the Inca state. Figure 2 shows the ethnic groups
present before and after the Inca conquest of the Pampas river basin.

7

According to Gonzalez Carre, recent work by ethnologists has located the descendants ofHancohuallu and his
8,000 warriors plus their families. They call themselves "Motilones" or "Lamistas" and are located in the village of
Lamas in the province of San Martin in the Mayo river valley. They speak a similar dialect of Quechua as those
from Huancavelica, Ayacucho, and Apurimac. They have a traditional story about their grandiose past and their
escape from the Incas. Additionally, in the village of Lamas, there is a street and neighborhood traditionally called
Anco Huallu in remembrance of their illustrious past (Gonzalez Carre 1992: 117).

31

Fig. 2: Ethnic groups before and after Inca conquest (Landa and Lopez 2005: 42-43).

The Incas transformed Vilcashuaman into an important provincial center and considered
it the geographical center of their empire. During the time of the Incas, Vilcashuaman's
jurisdiction included Huancavelica, Ayacucho, and part of Junin and Andahuaylas. Concerning
the number of inhabitants of the province, the 1586 census of Viceroy Toledo registered 36,000
tributaries (heads of family), which would roughly translate to 72,000 in the time of the Incas
(Huertas 1983: XV). 8 According to the 1586 declaration of kuraka Te6filo Willka of
Wankaraylla (Huancaraylla), the population during the time of the Incas was 400,000 people
(Yaranga Valderrama 1995: 244). The population of the provincial center Vilcashuaman is
estimated to have been around 30,000 to 40,000. Its plaza at the time could easily fit 20,000
people (Carabajal 1965 [1586]: 218). Because Vilcashuaman was an important Chanka strategic
center for controlling the Pampas river basin, it made sense for the Incas to transform

8

The epidemics, exploitation oflabor, and forcible relocation policies of the Spaniards led to a demographic
collapse in Peru. The population steadily declined until independence in the early 1800s, when there were less than
one million natives alive, compared to the 9-15 million alive during the time of the Incas (Handbook of south
American Indians, Demographic Collapse).

32

Vilcashuaman, one of the important seats of one of their most important enemies, into the
geographic center for their empire (Gonzalez Carre 1992: 115).
General Political Geographical Strategies of the Incas
Before examining the specific policies enacted by the Inca in the PomatamboVilcashuaman region and specifically around Pomatambo, one must first have an understanding
of the general strategies of control that the Incas employed in their conquests. Many scholars
such as Schreiber, D' Altroy, and Stanish have remarked that the Incas changed their strategies
according to the local conditions (Schreiber 1993; D' Altroy 1992; Stanish 1997). Therefore,
they pursued different kinds of policies in different parts of the empire and at different times. In
general, the strategies used by the Incas can be classified into two categories: indirect control and
direct control (D'Altroy 1992). Indirect control involves leaving local economies largely intact
and working through the local political system. Direct control involves substantial changes to
the political economical organization of the conquered territory (Schreiber 1993: 14). D' Altroy
pointed out that these strategies are linked to center-periphery considerations. When an empire
expands, areas that were once peripheral and under indirect hegemonic control strategies can
become centers that are under direct territorial control strategies. Therefore, these shifts can be
better understood as stages in a process of consolidation of imperial holdings (D' Altroy 1992:
74).
The Incas used a combination of indirect and direct strategies to consolidate their empire.
First, we shall return to the concept explained earlier about vertical complementarity of the
ecological zones. The basic unit of complementarity in the Andes was a highland to coast unit,
or lateral unit. "Islands" in between exchanged goods, ensuring the continual flow of goods up
and down the mountains to the coast. When an empire is created, it integrates these lateral (east-

33

west) units intact into a larger vertical unit (north-south). Caravan routes between these units,
both lateral and vertical, then, are of utmost importance, and whoever controlled them controlled
the land (Murra 1986: 49).

I want to argue that the main factors ofinca success had to do with

how they manipulated the geography and human adaptation to the particular geography in the
Andes to their economic and military advantage. They had the strategy of linking up selfsufficient lateral units through vertical roads, controlling the vital choke points in caravan routes,
and solidifying their economic and political control through indirect means, which was much
more efficient in light of their relatively primitive military technology. Thus, the north-south
roads and the Inca political system linked self-sufficient east-west units.
The Incas' success was in a big part due to their economic strategies of undermining and
softening resistance. In a pre-Inca chiefdom, the local lords had to manage complementarity
effectively through alliances with outside permanently settled kinsmen. This was the mode of
utilizing an east-west lateral economic unit when more than one chiefdom existed inside the selfsufficient unit. This strategy of colonizing outlier resources with kinsmen and forming alliances
with them was an effective way of managing competing highland polities. Thus, the foundations
of political and economic strategies that the Incas would later adopt in a more comprehensive
form were already being laid down (Lorandi 1986: 50). This form of consolidation allowed a
particular chiefdom access to resources outside the scope of its military control. Entering into an
alliance with kinsmen ensured that the parties all gained access to goods, especially luxury food
and ritual items, thus enhancing the prestige of each local lord.
When the Incas incorporated these chiefdoms, they employed similar strategies of
control. The Andes can be seen as a series of east-west lateral economic units on a north south
axis. I will call this set-up "peas in a pod." When the Incas expanded, they added these "peas"

34

pretty much intact both politically and economically. However, they incorporated these "peas"
in such a way that the imperial structure became a north-south "pod." The traditional
mechanisms of east-west exchange in these peas were replicated north-south (Salomon 1986:
113). There are three ways that the traditional east-west structure was replicated along the northsouth axis: through exchange of political and economic luxury items, through establishing kinties, and through the heavy construction of north-south highways. Thus, what were once
chiefdoms operating east-west with villages and lesser chiefdoms as the "islands" in the
economic framework, the chiefdoms themselves became the "islands" in the Inca economic
framework. However, what was transported north-south were political and economic luxury
items, and not so much agricultural products.
When the Inca first conquered and incorporated an area, they left the production
techniques intact, so that the highland to lowland exchange continued to be responsible for the
wealth of the local authorities. However, the Inca gave an outlet to this wealth: luxury items.
The local lords could now use their wealth on prestige items provided by the Inca and their more
sophisticated material and religious/political culture (Nunez 1986: 32). It became economically
advantageous for the local lords to give up some of their political authority in exchange for
prestige afforded by being integrated into a sophisticated civilization like the Incaic one. The
local east-west political and economic unit became a mini-version of the north-south imperial
one (Saloman 1986: 113). A mid-level Inca state apparatus managed the flow of goods and the
control of the local communities. Therefore, there were provincial capitals that acted like miniCuzcos (Saloman 1986: 113). The Incas would get tribute in the form of allegiance, labor,
soldiers, and foodstuffs, and in return would give luxury items such as fancy cloths, sophisticated
ritual pottery and other paraphernalia, and royal Inca women to the local lords.

35

The age-old method of establishing strong kinship ties to the local communities was
heavily employed by the Inca and served their purposes of turning the local communities into
mini-versions of the imperial structure. Marriage alliances affirmed the personal ties of each
local lord to the center. They would receive royal Inca women as wives, and also give their own
daughters to the Inca emperor's harem. This form of indirect rule facilitated Inca expansion
because of its relatively low cost and high effectivity of forging real alliances based on blood to
the center (Murra 1986: 51). However, this did not always work and there were often rebellions.
How did the Inca use geography to solve this problem?
Rebellions usually happened at the far-flung frontiers of the Inca Empire, where it was
harder to control the populations. The Inca therefore solved the problem of distance by
transplanting entire communities of the rebellious chiefdoms closer to the center of the empire.
They then populated the land of the rebellious chiefdoms with Inca settlers. Therefore, frontiers
were no longer as hard to control because ethnic Incas or tribes loyal to the Inca populated them.
This system was called the mitmaq in the Inca language (Lorandi 1986: 35). Furthermore, once
the rebellious peoples were removed from their homeland, they were no longer self-sufficient
and had to depend on the Inca imperial system to provide them with goods. How were the Inca
able to transplant entire communities? They built extensive north-south highways that could
handle the traffic oflarge populations, and transport them quickly.
The discussion of highways leads us to the other important factor in the rapid expansion
of the Inca Empire: their military strategy. They relied heavily on the strategy of potentially
controlling territory. This strategy was both efficient and necessary in light of the relatively
primitive military technology they had. In order to control the vast stretches of land, they did not
need to consolidate all of the land, but rather control key "choke points" in the caravan routes.

36

They did not even need to build city walls. Rather, they built fortresses on top or on the side of
mountains next to the key choke points in the caravan routes. A good example of this strategy
was how the Inca controlled the vast and long desert coast. The Inca from geographical-political
loci in the highlands managed the control of these desert valleys. They built extensive military
and political settlements in the highlands overlooking the valleys. They could, therefore, sweep
down at any moment and subdue any rebellion without extensively occupying the conquered
lowland territories (Dillehay 1977: 404). Furthermore, after conquering an area, they occupied
all the strategic points used by the conquered peoples, so the conquered peoples could not use
them in future rebellions.
The Incas also used the fragmentation of the chiefdoms to their advantage. Murra (1986)
said:
"The Inka did not undertake the consolidation of each expansive step; given the dispersed
nature of Andean settlement, their initial aim did not require a thorough control of every
pocket and valley on their route. The striking force could move swiftly, leapfrogging
over nuclei of resistance, particularly as 'they did not have to face universal resistance,
since each province defended its lands without receiving anyone's help, because they
were vehetrias (51)."
The Inca were extremely effective militarily because they emphasized dealing with one group at
a time. With their superior organization and military numbers, even the fiercest warriorkingdoms could not resist the onslaught of the Inca juggernaut.
The economic system discussed previously also allowed the Incas to mobilize large
numbers of troops quickly, move them quickly, and provide food and payment through luxury
goods effectively. In addition to material tribute, the local lords also had to give labor tribute.
Eventually, the Incas found that it was more efficient if they specify specialized labor tributes
from different groups. This extended to the military. Some ethnic groups only provided fighters,
and not laborers. They became even more specialized in that different groups would solely use

37

one weapon, for example, slings, maces, spears, or bows (Murra 1986: 55). This allowed the
Inca more control over the military because the ethnic divisions and distrust of each other was
kept intact.
The other labor groups would help build highways, storehouses, farm the land, and weave
the clothes to fill the storehouses. The storehouses throughout the empire facilitated the
nutritional and economic well being of the soldiers. They did not have to worry about protecting
supply lines (Murra 1986: 52). The highways made it possible to move large armies at lightning
speed. Furthermore, armies could always be raised and mobilized close to the area of conflict;
this ensured that rebellions would be squashed quickly and also that the Incas did not have to
worry as much about military overextension.
The overall strategy of the Inca provided a crucial advantage: that of self-sufficiency and
difficulty to defeat the Inca completely. The system of relatively self-sufficient east-west units
organized along a north-south axis was crucial in this scheme. Even if the Inca were defeated in
battles and lost control of one area, they still had many self-sufficient units left to mobilize
resources and troops from. Thus, they would keep trying until they defeated the resisting area,
whereas the resisting area could only hope that the Inca would give up, since the resistance
usually was loath to unify with other groups. For the most part, as long as the resistance did not
have superior technology, the Inca were invincible.

38

Chapter 3

DOWN AND OUT FROM THE PUCARAS9: INCA STATE
STRATEGIES OF CONTROL IN POMATAMBOVILCASHUAMAN
Now that the general strategies of control of the Inca are explained, how were some of
these strategies manifested in the control of the region ofVilcashuaman? Why did the Incas
choose these strategies? I will address these questions by examining four features of the
archaeological and cultural landscape of Pomatambo and its surrounding region of
Vilcashuaman: changes in settlement pattern, fortifications, roads, and religious related practices
and sites. Although the Inca province of Vilcashuaman had an extensive jurisdiction, I will only
focus on the immediate area around the capital (Figure 3).

9

Quechua for "fortress"

39

Settlements

The broader archaeological evidence shows that after an Inca conquest, LIP sites located
in defensive positions on hills or mountains were abandoned. The population centers in the
Pampas river basin listed in the 1586 Relaciones geograficas de Indias for Vilcashuam{m
province were most likely Inca mitimae centers. The absence of Inca pottery at many of the LIP
sites shows an abrupt abandonment. Cultural exchanges between the LIP groups and the Incas
did not seem to be a precursor to the Inca conquest of the area. In many of the sites, instruments
of war-maces, obsidian lances and arrowheads, etc.-could be found. The archaeological
evidence corroborates the historical data concerning the depopulation of most of the native
population in the Vilcashuaman region. Vilcashuaman was then transformed into an important
provincial center and repopulated with Incas of privilege and non-native ethnic groups.
The Incas probably pursued this strategy in Vilcashuaman because of the presence of the
hard to control ethnic groups there. The historical sources point to this region as one of the most
difficult conquests by the Inca. The combination of a difficult population and an extremely
important geo-strategic area may have been the primary reason the Incas decided to depopulate
the region nearly completely. Giving the region a zone of safety from rebellions helps ensure
that Vilcashuaman is hard to retake. Furthermore, because the "Chankas" of the area were
considered by the Incas to be one of their most formidable foes, the depopulation of the area
would have had a sobering demoralizing effect on the enemies of the Inca. Uranmarca, the
capital of the Hurin Chankas, was totally depopulated and repopulated by mitimaes (Von Hagen
1955: 152). An abandoned LIP fortress called Mollo Mollo stands above the mitimae settlement
(Espinosa Reyes 2002: 169). This policy demonstrated the political power and state capacity of
the Incas to be able to depopulate a militarily capable population.

40

It is interesting that the Tanquihuas were allowed to remain. One could only speculate
that the Incas did not think of them as a threat. The Tanquihuas may have been among the
friendly groups that allied with the Incas against their former "Chanka" conquerors. During the
Spanish conquest, the Tanquihuas were conspicuous in their absence in helping the Spaniards,
whereas the W ankas, Soras, and Lucanas were quick to aid the Spaniards (D' Altroy 1992; Stern
1982: 30).
The Inca policy of establishing mitimae colonies had the effect of breaking the old
economic and ethnic ties. The Incas left a landscape of extreme ethnic fragmentation and set up
a government in which each ethnic group interacted directly with the state more than it did with
other ethnic groups of the area. This ensured that the ethnic groups were dependent on the state,
and the mistrust sowed between the ethnic groups by the Incas helped prevent rebellions.
Pre-Inca and mitimae settlements
Vilcashuaman society before and after Inca reorganization was very different. The
Vilcashuaman area was totally depopulated by the Incas and repopulated by mitimaes, or
colonists loyal to the Inca. Only the Tanquihuas were not removed from the area, and they
settled in what are now Huambalpa, Guarcas, Huamanmarca, and Cochas (Carabajal 1965
[1586]: 219). The mitimaes came from nearly a dozen different ethnic groups from all over the
empire. According to Von Hagen, 200,000 mitimaes were transplanted to the river basin after it
was depopulated (Von Hagen 1955: 146). A compilation of archaeological surveys done in the
region revealed at least thirty-four LIP-related sites in an area roughly ten miles in radius from
Vilcashuaman (Gonzalez Carre et al 1987: 67-72). Of these thirty-four, twenty-three (68%) only
had LIP-era pottery. Three of these had only Inca pottery, but were located near LIP sites. Six
of these (18%) had both Inca and LIP-era pottery.

41

The fact that almost seven out often sites did not show any sign oflnca occupation
reflects the Inca policy of depopulation of the local populace. The abandoned LIP sites were, for
the most part, located in higher altitudes and in defensible locations like a peninsular hill or on
the top of a mountain. They were surrounded by retaining and defensive walls. This is
consistent with the archaeological remains of the Qaracha river basin directly west of
Vilcashuaman. It shows that the time before the Incas was a time of warfare.
Two of the more remarkable sites are Aukimarka and Muqu Alto. Aukimarka has around
800 circular buildings and two rectangular buildings, which is typical of the LIP settlement plans
(Gonzalez Carre et al 1988: 196). The rectangular buildings are usually at the center or the
highest point of the settlements, perhaps denoting religious or political purpose. A wall divided
Aukimarka in two zones (Gonzalez Carre 1988: 68).
Muqu Alto is located at the top of a very inaccessible and tall mountain east of
Vilcashuaman. At the west and north sides of the mountain are precipitous drops and many
immense boulders. Circular structures cover the entire area of the mountaintop that is
approximately 300 meters long and 200 wide (Chahud Gutierrez 1966: 7-8). Both of these sites
were abandoned after the Inca conquest.
The sites that had both Inca and LIP-era pottery were located at lower altitudes. These
sites are either mitimaes settling in previous LIP population centers or LIP populaces continuing
into the Inca era. Two of these sites, called Pinkulluna and Usnopata, are located tens of meters
away from each other behind the ushnu in Vilcashuaman. They were apparently part of a large
trash field used by the Incas. Excavations at Ushnopata and Pinkulluna show that under the trash
field were LIP pottery and large disordered stones (Chahud Gutierrez 1996: 25-27). This

42

supports the historical sources that say Vilcashuaman used to be a LIP population center before
the Incas.
The presence of large stones in disorder may point to a violent disruption of LIP life, or it
may be the remains of the fallen down Inca storehouses. I visited the site, and found that it
extended for hundreds of meters beyond this point. The sheer size of the trash field gives an idea
of the former population of the Inca city. It also testifies to the performances and feasting that
took place in Vilcashuaman as described by Cieza de Leon (1959[1553]). In Charles Weiner's
Peru and Bolivia, he draws a plan of the site, showing that there were some ruins where the
modern cemetery now stands. The modern cemetery, which dominates this site, apparently
destroyed the site. From Weiner's description, the site was of different construction than the
Inca ushnu and its compounds and in a worse state of preservation (Figure 4). He said the
stonework was reminiscent ofHuamachuco, which is now known as a Wari site (Weiner 1993
[1880]: 283). Because the stonework was different than the Inca stonework, the site may have
been older.

"Tempie"
"Ruines inconnaisablcs"

Trans: ·unknown ruins

Plano general de las ruinas de Vilcas Huaman. (Escala de 1 m. por 1,000 m.)

Fig. 4: Plan of the ruins ofVilcashuaman by Weiner 1993 !1880].

43

After this initial area was a series of small hills on the main peninsular hill. Along the
side of this peninsular hill was a pre-Hispanic road. At one point down the road, there was a
very large boulder with unidentifiable pottery fragments to the right. Even further down were
some more immense boulders. There was a pre-Hispanic tomb in a hole under one of them. On
the left side of the road, some parts of the hill collapsed, leaving a nice stratigraphy. The
remains I saw were consistent with the archaeological reports. From this peninsular hill, one
could clearly see the ushnu and its surrounding compounds dominating the area. One also had a
commanding view of the Vischongo River valley below and a clear view of Pillucho, the preHispanic fortress. It seemed that this area used to be inhabited in the LIP. The ushnu and its
associated compounds sealed this peninsular hill from the main part of town, perhaps
intentionally.
The placement of the new Inca sites and the appropriation ofVilcashuarnan's importance
reflect a definite Inca state agenda of making the area an administrative center and the
geographic center of the Inca Empire.
Storehouses
Vilcashuarnan held a significant number of storehouses, which were vital for the supply
of the army, redistribution, and regaling local elites, all crucial elements in maintaining control
over the area. According to Cieza, on the side of a hill near the plaza were over 700 storehouses,
in addition to numerous magazines (Cieza de Le6n 1959: 127). The trash fields containing
numerous animal bones behind the ushnu testify to the feasting carried out by the Incas.
Storehouses played a pivotal role in the management of the Inca political economy. They were
vital for the supply and maintenance of a mobile army, of administrative and religious personnel,

44

of specialists attached to the state (mostly mitimaes in Vilcashuaman area), and corvee laborers
(D' Altroy 1992: 163). The sheer number of storehouses in Vilcashuaman showed the
importance of this provincial center to the Inca.
Pre-Inca Pomatambo
For reference, Figure 5 shows the location of the places mentioned below. The plaza of
Pomatambo is located at the end of a large and remarkable rocky promontory (Photo 1). The
promontory is shaped like a peninsula and has immense stones of five to fifteen feet tall scattered
at its base. It is about 400 meters long and 200 meters wide. The top surface of it is a distinctive
reddish-orange color, and the sides of it are rocky and dark gray. There are various small caves
at the east side of it, and a small cave on top. There are pottery fragments of utilitarian ware.
These fragments are rude and do not have fine slip. They are the same make as the pottery seen
in Vilcashuaman and on top of Pillucho. The most common color is orange, but there are also
grey, grey/black, and reddish fragments. There is an abundance of obsidian flakes, and I saw
three obsidian points. There are also quartz fragments, a red and smooth stone (possibly chert),
and other unidentified stones used as tools.
The locals call this hill "Aya Orqo" meaning "Hill of the dead." It seems to have been a
LIP cemetery. According to the locals, the church was built over a chul/pa in the 1920s. The
church now stands at the end of the mound. In the 1970s, the plaza of Pomatambo was leveled
and expanded. According to the locals and a schoolteacher who taught there at the time, this
uncovered many intact pottery pieces, ashes, and human bones. Near the end of the hill is a
small cave going down into the ground. One of the locals told me that his son once went down it
before they covered it up. He said that it seemed like it was a Chanka temple. He said there
were many stone tools, especially stones with a circular depression in them, perhaps mortar

45

stones. Because of the large size of this hill and its abundance of artifacts, it seems that there
was a relatively large population in the surrounding area in the pre-Inca era. This hill, for its
unusual shape and composition, seemed to have had a religious function. If the hill was a
cemetery, it is not clear where the population center was. It may have been subsumed under
modern Pomatambo. According to Navarro de! Aguila, LIP cemeteries of the region were
usually located a distance from the population center and located on a promontory (Navarro de!
Aguila 1983 [I 939]: 160). The presence of so many ancient cultural elements in Pomatambo
implies its importance in the pre-Inca era.
The number of abandoned fields around Pomatambo also testifies to it being a possible
population center in the pre-Inca era. The tall mountains in front of Aya Orqo are almost
completely covered with walled-in fields. The sheer number of them, about 190 just on one side
of the mountain directly in front of the cemetery, points to a time where the area was more
densely settled than it is now. At the bottom of the hill is a canal that runs for several miles. The
age of the canal is not clear. The canal is directly above a small stream of Pomatambo. This
steam feeds into the Pampas River. Not insignificantly, an Inca road runs along the side of Aya
Orqo and connects with another Inca road less than half a mile away. The significance of the
roads will be discussed later.

46

Fig. 5 Map of Pomatambo. Abandoned fields are south of river. Thin line that ends in the "i" is pre-Hispanic
road.

Pomatambo does not seem to have been settled during the Inca era because of the
absence of Inca pottery. Almost all the pottery, with the exception of a couple of sherds of fine
slipped redware, was utilitarian and rude. Since the pottery corresponded to the LIP pottery seen
elsewhere, I am pretty confident that the pottery sherds on Aya Orqo are from the LIP. In
addition, there used to be a chullpa on top of the hill, lending more credence to the hypothesis
that the hill is from the LIP. Furthermore, Pomatambo is not listed in the Relaciones geograjicas
de Jndias of 1586, minimizing the probability that it was continuously inhabited since the LIP. It

is also not listed in the census done in 1729. According to a history of the village done by the

47

head schoolteacher, archival records about Pomatambo go back to 1638, when it was a place to
graze animals. It was the first possession of the Spanish military general Francisco Rudas and
his wife Petronila Guillen de Mendoza, who was the sister of Diego Guillen de Mendoza
(Najarro Quispe 2006: 1). This historical evidence shows that Pomatarnbo was not continuously
inhabited, increasing the chances that it was not inhabited during the Inca era.
Fortifications
Fortifications, in general, were of utmost importance in defending the people and the area
around it. In times of war, people flee to fortifications for three main reasons. The first is that it
is very expensive and impractical for the assailant to maintain a siege for a long time, especially
a distance away from supplies (D'Altroy 1992: 76). Supply lines were crucial to any pre-modern
war, especially in successfully besieging a fortification. In medieval times in Europe, the general
rule was that a siege went no longer than forty days due to the fact that soldiers were also
farmers. They needed to farm, and a longer siege would encroach on time needed to plant
(David Rousseau, personal communication 2005). As long as the socio-political mechanisms did
not evolve to be able to accommodate standing armies, fortifications were reliable way to
potentially control territory. The second reason was that a protracted siege quickly dampens the
morale of the besieging soldiers (Sun Tzu 2002). The third reason was that a fortification
concentrated the defending population in a small, and strategically advantageous space, making
it harder for the enemy to divide and conquer. Therefore, as long as the enemy did not have the
state capacity to sustain a prolonged siege, well-defended fortifications were almost sure
defenses against permanent conquest. Fortifications placed near choke points served the
function of potentially controlling the largest area possible. As long as the fortress held, the
enemy could not permanently subdue the area that the fortress potentially controlled. A pre-

48

modern war was won not so much by valor as by skillful supply of the conquering army, the
skillful defense of fortifications, and cutting of the enemy's supply lines by the defenders (Sun
Tzu 2002).
Because the pre-Inca societies of Vilcashuarnan were not specialized enough to afford a
permanent standing army or a protracted siege, fortifications would have been the primary
defense mechanism. The archaeological and historical evidence ofVilcashuaman resoundingly
confirms this hypothesis. As stated before, Garcilaso de la Vega mentioned that Hancohuallo,
the Villca Chanka captain, regretted abandoning the two famous fortresses his ancestors made,
Surarnarca and Challkumarca, more than the rest of his dominions. This shows the importance
fortifications held in the pre-Inca societies ofVilcashuaman. The fact that these fortifications
were usually located on top of a mountain doubled the value of these places. Hills, along with
rivers, streams, and lakes, unusual stones, and ancestral mummies were considered huacas or
apus: gods (Stern 1982: 14). Therefore, hilltop fortifications were both the residences of their

gods and the fastnesses of their people. When the Incas conquered the area, they depopulated and
ruined these fortifications (Sarmiento de Gamboa 1967 [1572]: 149). However, Pillucho was an
exception, and continued to be used by the Incas and later by the early Spanish conquistadors.
Why was this?
Pillucho
The adoration of the mountain Pillucho, or Qatun Urqu Pata (Q. "Great hill mesa"),
reflected in its importance as a huaca and as a fortress in the pre-Inca days. As the crow flies, it
is three miles from Vilcashuaman and five miles by foot. On top are extensive ruins of collapsed
defensive walls, hundreds of circular foundations, a rectangular foundation, and five relatively
well-preserved chullpas. In 1586, Pedro de Carabajal described the fortress:

49

Hay en el pueblo viejo de Vilcas, questa una legua deste dicho pueblo, una fortaleza de
canteria bien labrada, que solia servir de fuerte cuando era frontera de los ingas, aunque
agora esta deshecha una parte della (216).
There is in the old pueblo ofVilcas and one league from the said pueblo a well-made
fortress, which used to habitually serve as a fastness when it was a frontier of the Incas,
although now it is partially ruined (translation mine).
This is the same fortress described by Cieza de Leon as the one used by the Soras, Lucanas, and
a number of other ethnic groups of the area against the Inca invasion (Cieza de Leon 1959
[l 553]: 125). It has a very distinctive appearance, shaped like a falcon's bealc It dominates the
skyline ofVilcashuaman.
It was obviously a very important fortress because even people as far as the province of
Huamanga, more than thirty miles north, joined with the Soras, Lucanas, and other ethnic groups
of the region. This was probably the case because of the prime location and constitution of the
fortress. It is protected on three sides by deep river canyons and is only accessible by a very
narrow and precarious route on the north side (Chahud Gutierrez 1966:9). The hill acts as a
natural fortress even without walls because of the rocky cliffs that are its slopes. Furthermore,
Pillucho has a natural spring and many caves around the top (Cieza de Leon 1959: 231 ). The
spring was crucial to hold against the sieges, and caves were sacred places for the LIP ethnic
groups of the area, as they often interred their dead inside them (Navarro de] Aguila 1983: 160).
One can see the entire town ofVilcashuaman, including the peninsular promontory
extending from it, from Pillucho. The combination of being located in a strategic place, being a
remarkable shape and constitution, having a natural spring on top, naturally only having one
point of entrance, having many caves, and commanding a wide panorama made Pillucho an
extremely ideal place for veneration. It was an extremely secure place due to the water supply
on top. In fact, according to Cieza de Leon, the Incas besieged the place for two years until at
last, food ran out and the defenders had to surrender.

50

The importance of Pillucho as a fortress and as a religious site is indubitable because of
its association with the religious ruins on top ofQatun Cruz (Q. "Great Cross"), one of the peaks
of Cerro Auquillana, some ten miles away. I traveled to Cerro Auquillana when the locals told
me there were ruins on top. "Auquilla" means the princess of the stars, and refers to Venus
(Jimenez de la Espada 1965: 241 ). On top of Qatun Cruz are the ruins of what appears to be a
LIP sanctuary. It consists of a central structure and a series of stone pillars surrounding it. The
structure is located at the highest elevation of Qatun Cruz. The central structure is circular and
has very thick walls that have collapsed. The diameter of the inner area is about six meters, and
the diameter of the total area of the ruin is twenty-two meters by twenty-two meters. The inside
surface of the wall is concave. In the middle of this circular structure is a large stone, about four
feet by five feet. It is partially buried, and may be larger. A series of stone pillars surround the
structure. The entrance of the circular structure is relatively narrow, maybe only 1 meter wide,
and faces approximately 30 degrees south of east. (Figure 6)

JOm

Rough Sketch of Qatun Cruz
Fig. 6: Rough plan of Qatun Cruz. Stone in the center of circular building has the highest elevation of 4122 m
above sea level.

51

The entrance is notable because it is in direct alignment with and frames the hilltop of
Pillucho. Cerro Auquillana has three peaks with archaeological ruins and is the most prominent
mountain of the immediate region. From Qatun Cruz, the highest of the peaks, one can see many
miles around (Figme 7).

Fig. 7: Diagram of comfortable visibility from Qatun Cruz (black "X")

One can see the old Inca road, the lagoon Ccochararacan, Aukimarka, Pomatambo's preColumbian cemetery, and many other important sites. The alignment of the entrance of Qatun
Cruz and Pillucho is not coincidental and shows the past importance of Pillucho and of Cerro
Auquillana. Archaeological investigations on Pillucho carried out by Lizandro Jorge Torres

52

Palomino in 1965 and 1966 revealed that both the Chankas and the Incas used the site, but the
vast majority of the pottery was of the Chankas (Gonzalez Carre 1992:38). In fact, there is
evidence that the caves in the cliffs of Pillucho were inhabited since at least 600 C.E. (Alvarez
Quispe et al. 2003: 11). Also, Pillucho was used by Huascar's troops against Atahualpa's in the
civil war (Cobo 1979 [1653]: 166). The continual occupation of this strategic place shows the
level of veneration it held among the people.
Cerro Aquillana, with its pillars, may have served many functions: as a strategic site, as
an astronomical and religious site, and as a huaca. The aligmnent could also be strategic, as the
besiegers cannot see Auquillana's peaks from the base of Pillucho, only from the top of it. This
allows fire or fire signals to be given to the defenders of Pillucho. Thus, the locals could prepare
to fortify their position long before the enemy arrives. Given that the wall Siqi Rumi is exactly
lined up with Qatun Cruz, there is a possibility Qatun Cruz may have been the center of a
religious ceque system (Figure 8). This shows that there may have been a coherent religious
system in the area before the Incas, giving Incas all the more reason to appropriate the region for
state purposes.

Fig. 8: Siqi Rumi upper wall aligns perfectly with Qatun Cruz. Map adapted from Google Earth.

53

Settlements discussion
Why did the Incas depopulate most LIP population centers of the area and dismantle the
fortifications, but re-inhabited Vilcashuaman and reused Pillucho? According to D' Altroy, the
major provincial centers of the Inca Empire were located adjacent to natural conduits of travel
and open valleys or plains, which would have facilitated bivouacking an army. They were
positioned to reduce the threat of internal attack and supply armies that suppress insurrections
(D' Altroy 1992: 80). Vilcashuaman, itselflocated at a strategic point, had an extra advantage of
a natural fortress at Pillucho. Because Vilcashuaman had great significance for the LIP groups
before the Inca, it made sense to establish a provincial center here. It also transformed the region
from a peripheral and uncontrollable zone to a core and defensible zone. Vilcashuaman's ample
storage facilities were able to supply the army that successfully besieged Pillucho for two years.
The dismemberment of most of the fortifications, which also held great religious significance for
the former local populace, demoralized the populace and also ensured that there would be a time
lag in repairing the ruins and holding the fortification. This time lag would allow the Incas to
strike swiftly and crush the insurrections of the area. Because Vilcashuaman was important to
the Inca imperial agenda, they used highly direct methods of control: mass depopulation, open
warfare, relocation of populations, and movement of settlements to lower places.
So far, we have investigated two facets of political geographical control of the Incas in
Vilcashuaman: settlements and fortifications. Both can be geographically abstracted as points,
with fortifications acting as a point that controls a potential area. Our next topic, roads, can be
geographically abstracted as lines. After the discussion of roads, we will have examined the
three basic units of geography: points, lines, and areas.

54

Roads
Roads connect points at which populations could be effectively governed. They have
four main purposes: facilitate the movement, acquisition, management, and protection of labor
(Hyslop 1984: 248). The policy ofresettlement of subject populations discussed in the
settlements section has a direct connection with Inca road building. Inca roads connected subject
peoples whose labor formed the backbone and source of wealth and power for the Inca state
(Hyslop 1984: 276). In Vilcashuaman, the road to Uranmarca bifurcates several times, possibly
reflecting changing policies of the Inca over time. After much combing through various sources
about the roads around Vilcashuaman and personally walking some parts of it, the Inca road
network around Vilcashuaman shows much complexity and evidence of change over time. A
history of the roads of any given area could reveal much about state policies of control. In this
section, I will explore the various routes, control points, bridges, and other archaeological
remains around Vilcashuaman in an attempt to form a picture of the road system's role in the
strategies of control employed by the Incas.
Vilcashuaman was at the crossroads of two major Inca highways: the north-south
Chinchasuyu highway, and the east-west highway down to the coast. The Inca roads were
punctuated by tambillos and royal tampus, or wayside stations. Tambillos were located about a
mile to a mile and a half from each other and were very simple and small houses. Tampus, on
the other hand, were located about a day or day and a halfs journey from each other. They were
much larger and had extensive storage facilities (Hyslop 1984: 278-281 ). At various points,
especially near population centers and bridges, control gates control the movement of people.
These control gates were placed in natural choke points of movement of peoples: around
population centers and at bridges.

55

In addition to the highways, there was a vast network of smaller branch and lateral roads
that are not as well understood (Hyslop 1984: 256). The successive rebuilding of roads by
different Inca rulers further complicates this. Cieza de Leon noted that the Inca emperors liked
to outdo each other in the magnificence of their highways. They would, therefore, build wider
roads and the old roads built by the previous emperor would no longer be used:
This was when such a king set out on some conquest, or to achieve something worthy of
memory, that it might be said that the road prepared for him was larger than any made
before. This is clearly the case, for I have seen three or four roads near Vilcas, and I even
lost my way on one, believing that I was on the one which is now in use. These roads are
called, one the road of the Ynca Yupanqui, another ofTupac Inca; and that which is now
used, and always will be hereafter, is that ofHuayna Ccapac, reaching to the river
Ancasmayu in the north, and to the south far beyond what we now call Chile ... (44)"
Hylsop confirms this when he observed that one could see the remains of an older, narrower, and
more winding road next to a newer, wider, and straighter road (Hylsop 1984: 260). Sometimes,
the Incas used pre-existing roads of the Wari Empire and probably the LIP roads also.
As Cieza de Leon said, there are three or four roads going in the direction of Cuzco
around Vilcas. I found that there are three roads that branch off in Vilcashuarnim itself going
towards Cuzco. However, some of these roads bifurcate or merge along the way. Figure 9
shows the alternative routes. Pl, P2, and P3 are the Puccas routes, and Sis the Saurarna route.
Von Hagen in the 1950s traced the Saurama route, Espinoza Reyes (2002) traced the P2 route,
Baldeon Malpartida et al. (2005) traced the P3 route, and my own experience traced the PI route.
Pl, P2, and P3 become one route between the villages of Pomatambo and Pinchas. These routes
constitute a part of the Chinchasuyu highway (Baldeon Malpartida et al. 2005: 129).

56

Fig. 9: Diagram of Inca roads going to Uran Marca. Map adapted from Espinoza Reyes 2002: 164.

Puccas Routes
My hypothesis is that the Pl is one of the oldest roads, if not the oldest, for the main
reason that it is the only one that connects pre-Inca settlements. It originates on the northeast
exit ofVilcas, goes through Chito, then to Ccollpapampa, then to Pomatambo, then to Puccas,
and then to Uranmarca. Pl passes by a chullpa near Ccollpapampa and Pomatambo. It then
passes by the LIP cemetery of Pomatambo. Under the road at one point is a cave with human
remains, possibly from the LIP. A few hundred meters further along, it passes by a possible LIPera sacred site Arteza Rumi. From there it connects to another Inca road to Puccas. On the

57

stretch of road from the cemetery to the merge with the main Puccas road, there is a ruin of two
small rectangular structures made of stone. The walls are very thick and unlike the usual
construction of the area. The ruin is located about 40 to 60 feet from the road. On the road
below the ruin, there is a large stone with a hole and many wear-grooves. It was apparently a
hitching post for animals (Photo 2). This ruin is strategically located in front of two
promontories, one of which is the LIP cemetery. This ruin may have been a tambillo in the Inca
era, but only archaeological investigation in the future can confirm this.
Along this road in Pomatambo, one can see gigantic stones stacked in disorder on the side
of the road. Some of these stones were worked and broken off from elsewhere, possibly Arteza
Rumi. It raises the possibility that the Incas broke off parts of the possible nearby LIP sanctuary
and used the stones to line the road, making a strong religious and political statement. In 1966,
Chahud Gutierrez surveyed Arteza Rumi and found that under some of the stones, one can find
human craniums and bones. The ceramic remains are abundant in the first twenty-five
centimeters of earth, and appear to be "Chanka" pottery (Chahud Gutierrez 1966: 27). Chahud
Gutierrez seemed pretty confident that there was no Inca pottery at the site. He also said that the
bones were in a great disorder and very disturbed. Chahud Gutierrez noted that at Arteza Rumi,
an unusual stone stood out because it had channels and holes carved into it, and had a very
smooth surface. It measured 2.9 meters long and 1.9 meters wide (Chahud Gutierrez 1966: 6).
Arteza Rumi is located a couple of hundred feet off the road, and many of the stones have either
collapsed naturally or have been pushed down. My interpretation for this site is that it was a
ritual area for the LIP people of the area. It is a natural rocky outcrop in the shape of an arc. It
had a wall added to one side of it, giving it a "D" shape. There are many gigantic stones that

58

have been worked in some way. The Incas may have quarried stone from here to add to the
retaining walls of their roads (Photo 3).
From Puccas, the road goes to Uranmarca, one of the royal Inca tampus. This road can
be quite narrow at some points, maybe only five feet wide. At its widest, before it connects with
the main Puccas (P2) road, it reaches about fifteen feet. The small Pomatambo River divides the
promontories from the ruins. An old canal, which is still in use today, is located above the small
stream on the side of the promontories. This canal, neatly lined with stones, stretches for
approximately 2. 7 kilometers.
The other Puccas roads are either contemporaneous with or younger than the first route.
First, they are on average wider than the first route; and second, an Inca ruin called Siqi Rumi
(Q. "Lined up stones") with gigantic fitted stones overlooks these Puccas routes. P2 starts from
Vilcashuaman, goes to Vizcachayoc, then to the south side of lagoon Ccochararacan, then to
Huancapuquio, passes by Pomatambo, and then goes to Puccas. P3 also starts from
Vilcashuaman, goes to Vizcachayoc, then to the north side of lagoon Ccochararacan, and then
merges with P2 at Huancapuquio. At Huancapuquio, another road diverges going in the
direction of Saurama. Where this leads to is uncertain, and only future research can confirm its
destination.
Unfortunately, all the Puccas routes are badly preserved, and the main Puccas route, P2,
the one that the Incas used early on, has been paved over with a modern road. Only a few short
segments of it can be seen where the modern road could not pave over due to the uneven terrain.
At Puccas, at a place called "Escalerayoc" or "Place of the stairs," is a long staircase that takes
one to the bottom of the valley and to the banks of the Pampas River. It is about one kilometer

59

down in terms of absolute height, but much longer, about three or four miles, by foot (Espinosa
Reyes 2002: 166-167).
Siqi Rumi is a very impressive gigantic structure made of two walls in the form of a "D."
This cannot be seen from the earlier Puccas route that went through Ccollpapampa and
Pomatambo, but only the main Puccas route, which passes by Pomatambo but does not go
through it. It is located on a slope, and the wall located on the higher altitude is taller than the
lower wall, which makes up the curved part of the "D." The upper wall is about 225 meters
long, and the lower wall is about 320 meters long (Figure 5). Unlike the stones in Vilcashuaman,
these stones were removed from the rocky outcrops directly under it and are soft. From Puccas
road P2, it looks much taller than viewed from behind. Viewed from behind, one cannot see the
lower wall or the bottom layer of the upper wall. It has fallen into ruin, and many of the stones
were displaced or broken up to make tombstones. At its highest point, which is in the upper
wall, it measures over fifteen feet tall. It is most impressive when viewed from the Puccas roads,
and probably served as a reminder to those passing on the road that the Incas were in control.
The Incas quarried from these rocks and fitted them on top of the former natural
protuberance of rock. The natural protuberan.ce was also shaped. This site is very close to and
visible from the LIP cemetery in Pomatambo. The Incas modified the site by quarrying and
shaping the stones to produce a very impressive enclosure. At first, I thought it may have been a
fortress of some sort, but the fact that the walls are easy to scale and that there is no Inca pottery
in the enclosed space led me to believe that the structure was built to make a political or religious
statement. An Inca version of Arteza Rumi may have been intended at Siqi Rumi because of the
similar shapes ("D"). Both the Incas and the LIP groups of the area revered stones and unusual
rock formations as sacred. The sculpting and dominating of the old stone huacas by the Incas

60

would have served to establish the Incas' divine mandate in the area. This reflects the legend
that the stones near Cuzco turned into Inca soldiers to aid them in the battle against the Chankas,
leading to their defeat. It shows that the divine mandate fell in the hands of the Incas, giving
them legitimate dominion over the land. The great visibility of the structure, its impressive scale,
and probable former religious significance for the locals leads me to the conclusion that this
structure had the primary purpose of impressing the local populace. In 1586, Pedro de Carabajal
wrote that when the Incas conquered Vilcas, they mandated that the locals worship Inca gods. At
the same time, they destroyed the stone huacas of the locals (Carabajal 1586: 218). This heavyhanded strategy was used to demoralize and to affirm the divine mandate of the rule of the Incas.
The evidence oflnca disruption of LIP sites on Pl and P2, especially religious ones,
reflect the Inca strategy of elevating their own gods over the gods of the locals. Making the
disruptions as visible as possible would have served as reminders of the Inca primacy in the area.
Saurama Route
Victor Von Hagen traced this route in the 1950s. It leaves from the southeast side of the
plaza of Vilcashuaman. A bit further down this road was a control gate called "Pillau-ccasi."
The ruins of garrison guard stations accompanied it. The road to Huambalpa, which leaves from
the southwest side of the plaza, also has a control gate the same distance from the plaza. These
stations were used to control the movement of people (Von Hagen 1955: 148). When the Incas
depopulated the landscape and transplanted colonists, they plarmed new settlements and greatly
reordered the population distributions of the area to their own economic and political needs. The
Incas also heavily controlled the movement of these people in the immediate Vilcashuaman area
through numerous control gates located near population centers and bridges.

61

The Saurama route had a very long staircase down to the banks of the Pampas, like the
one at Puccas. Von Hagen, with a tone of awe, said:
There must have been at least three thousand consecutive stone steps. The distance was, as
Don Pedro had said, 'short,' but it was a truly astonishing piece of engineering. Being all dry
masonry, this necessitated elaborate terracing with retaining walls for which the rock had to
be carried some distance before it could be faced and worked. It was-in this realm of
astonishments--one of the most extraordinary of these amazing roads (I 51 ).
On the other side of the Pampas River, at Pariabamba, were the ruins of the immense towers that
held the suspension bridge over the river. Cieza de Leon walked over the bridge that used to be
there nearly five hundred years ago and said that it was one hundred and sixty-six paces long
(Von Hagen 1955: 152).
I believe that this road is the most recent because it does not bifurcate as much as the
Puccas routes, implying that its use had a shorter time frame. Secondly, it passes close to the
Inca-era mitimae settlement of Carhuanca. Thirdly, it abandons the more straightforward route
to Uranmarca, implying that its existence was due to the need to connect Inca mitimae
settlements.
Roads discussion
Seeing the complex network of roads around Vilcashuaman, it is not a surprise that Cieza
de Leon lost his way. He probably was traveling on of the Puccas routes when he realized he
was on the wrong road. He said that the road to Cuzco in use was the one of Huayna Ccapac, the
last of the emperors that built roads around Vilcashuaman. The other two were of Pachacutec
and Topa Inca. Because the Saurama route is probably the youngest, this might have been the
one that Cieza de Leon eventually traveled on to get to Cuzco.
The evolution of these roads reflects a long history of consolidation of control of the
immediate Vilcashuaman region. When dominance was first established, the Incas used the pre-

62

existing roads. However, they did make changes to these roads. In the case of PI, they
apparently broke off worked stone from elsewhere and incorporated them into the retaining walls
of the road. Then the Incas further established monuments to their dominance with P2 and P3 by
the building of structures like Arteza Rumi. P2 and P3 were located on lower ground than Pl
and would have connected some of the displaced settlements, whlch were moved from higher
altitudes. It is not clear at the time of P2 and P3 that the mitimae policy was implemented. It is
also a real possibility that these roads existed in the pre-Inca days, as they pass by Lagoon
Ccochararacan, the biggest lagoon of the area. Also, there are literally thousands of walled in
fields that are now abandoned close the P2 and P3. Some of these undoubtedly date from the
pre-Inca as well as the Inca era (Photo 4). It is notable that these routes can be seen from Cerro
Auquillana, a possible LIP religious and strategic site.
Later, the Saurarna route totally abandoned the direction of the more straightforward
Puccas routes to Uranmarca, the next royal tampu. The Saurama route connected what were
certainly mitimae settlements such as Carhuanca. Interestingly, one cannot see this route from
Cerro Auquillana, supporting my claim that this road was used later. Because Cieza de Leon
said that the last royal road built by the Incas at Vilcas was the Huayna Ccapac road, the
Saurama road may be this road, but this is only speculation. It was very expensive to make a
completely new road, so the reasons for building it must have been very important. Connecting
new population centers would have been very important.
According to the chronicles, specifically Cieza de Leon and Garcilaso de la Vega, the
area was hard to subdue for many years. The "Chankas" of the region, along with those of
Uranmarca and Andahuaylas, submitted at first under duress, but later revolted. However,
Pachacutec subdued the region once and for all after the Chanka rebellion, and implemented the

63

mitimae policies. The evolution of these roads might hint at a more gradual evolution of policies

leading up to the mitimae settlements. Instead of Pachacutec subduing and rebuilding
Vilcashuaman, establishing new roads, and resettling the populations both dowuward and outside
populations inward, these processes may have been spread out over several reigns.
The evolution of the roads reflect a three-prong strategy of consolidation of control of the
area: 1) using pre-existing roads in military expeditions and establishing territorial dominance
through the military defeat of the area, 2) resettling local populations to areas where they are
more easily controlled, and building control point structures around these areas, and 3)
transplanting foreign communities to repopulate the war-depopulated region for economic and
security purposes. The fact that the people ofVilcas, Saras and Lucanas said in a 1586 visita
that Topa Inca was the one who conquered them show that a deeper penetration of local
populations did not happen until after Pachacutec (Carabajal 1586: 213). Another line of
evidence that supports this theory is the presence of Cafiari mitimaes in the Vilcashuaman area
from far-flung Ecuador. Ecuador was not subdued until later during the reigns ofTopa Inca and
Huayna Capac (Gonzalez Carre 1992: 126). Even though the region may have been "conquered"
militarily by Pachacutec, the control of the area was not consolidated, and the pre-Inca selfsufficiency of the local ayllus not yet disrupted, until later.

Religion

It should be no surprise that religion was so intimately tied to military, social, and
economic life of the native peoples of the Vilcashuaman region because all those aspects of life
were intimately tied to the landscape. Their pacarinas, or places of origin and creation, were the
hills, the caves, the rivers, and the lakes. Their gods also resided or were these features of the

64

landscape. The landscapes helped shape the economic structure, and at the same time the social
structure, of these peoples. The landscape also provided safety from one's enemies.
Just as their pacarinas and huacas were ranked in order of importance, so were the
different ay/lus. The Andean image of cosmos seemed plausible not only in internal logic and
explanatory power, but also because it reflected real social relationships. "The kin groups within
a heirarchy of households and ay/lus paid homage to parallel networks of huacas, sacred beings
or powers materialized in hills, waters, caves, stones, ancestor mummies, and so forth (Stern
1982: 14)." Religion and ritual had the effect of unifying these ay/lus. By ritualizing hostility
between ay/lu "brothers" in the form of friendly teasing and taunts, antagonisms between these
ayllus were controlled. Although there was still armed conflict every now and then, religion and
ritual allowed antagonisms to be controlled to an extent that would allow cooperative efforts.
Therefore, certain rituals acted as catharsis and expression for internal antagonisms, but in such a
way that also unified the different ay/lus (Stern 1982: 18). By moving local populations around,
moving foreign ayllus in, and usurping their sacred places for Inca use, the Inca conquest
represented a radical departure for the local societies of the Vilcashuaman area. The old
relationships between the huacas and pacarinas, just as the old relationships between the
different ayllus and ethnic groups, were effectively destroyed. New relationships were created
between the local groups and the Incas, and the nature of self-sufficiency and autonomy changed
drastically.
The changes described earlier with settlement patterns, fortifications, and roads all have
an element of religious change. Old ties were broken, and new dependent ones created to the
Inca state, just as old gods were subsumed under the new Inca gods. With the new ties came
new roads to manifest the ties between groups and to the Inca state. The breakup of the

65

relationship between Cerro Auquillana and Pillucho is an example of the breaking of old ties,
both divine and societal. The act of placing structures on top of sacred sites has always been a
form of asserting religious dominance across cultures. The Catholic Church on top of the Inca
temple in Vilcashuaman shows the irony of the Incas being subjugated relatively shortly after the
Incas subjugated the local populations and modified their holy sites.
To subdue the peoples of the Vilcashuaman region, the Incas not only employed
territorial control methods, but also acted purposefully to defeat hearts and minds through
altering the religious landscape, affirming a parallel myth and religion that diminished the divine
mandate of the local peoples, and capturing their ancestor mummies and idols. The Incas
pursued similar strategies at Tiwanaku, by appropriating the sacredness of Tiwanaku and Lake
Titicaca, turning the place into a sacred place of the Incas (Stanish 1997). In a sense, the Inca
strategies of control in Vilcas encompassed all aspects of life: economic, social, military, and
religious. The Incas used the common aspects of their religion and the Vilcashuaman people's
religion, such as worship of stones and ancestors, to affirm the superiority of their own sacred
stones and ancestors.
The intricate series of canals and waterworks in their relationship to temples and peoples
at Vilcashuaman itselfreplicated a sacred landscape. The Temple of the Sun and Moon, the

ushnu, the canals that divided the neighborhoods and issued from the temples, and the shape of
Vilcashuaman in the form of a falcon reflected a new religious landscape of the Incas. By
capturing the old idols and sending them far away, mandating the worship ofinca gods, and by
systematically changing the landscape to suit the new religious ideology, the Incas created new
relationships to sacred places and to the state from a tabula rasa that resulted from intensive
disruption and depopulation.

66

Syncretism
Another way in which the Incas subdued the local peoples through religion was to
incorporate elements of native myths into their own. This gave them more divine legitimacy in
their supremacy over a conquered populace. Charles Stanish believes that the different origin
myths of the Incas were not due to the error of the chroniclers, but rather reflective of the Inca
strategy of tailoring versions of their myths to "suit the specific political and historical realities
of areas being incorporated (Stanish 1997: 201)." Therefore, different myths about the origins of
the Incas existed in the different parts of the empire.
In this light, it is interesting to note that one of the origin myths of the Incas echoes many
elements of the origin myth of the Wankas, Chankas, and Pokcras. The origin myth emphasized
water and the civilizing power of the three brothers. In a way, the myth reflects reality in that
water and the ability to "civilize" it through agricultural works such as canals and terracing was
crucial to the origins of these three societies. Likewise, the Inca myth of the Manco Capac and
Mama Ocllo said that these founders of the Incas came forth from Lake Titicaca. The Ayar
brothers, also founders, came from the three windows at Paqari Tambo (Q. inn of dawn or place

of origin) near Cuzco (Taipe Campos 2003: 189). The Incas came from the middle window, or
"Capac Toco" (Q. rich window). The Tambos came from the window Sutic Toco, and the Maras
came from the window Maras Toco. These two nations were allied with the Incas. The three
windows or three caves supposedly found their source at Lake Titicaca several hundred
kilometers south of Cuzco, and the ancestors traveled from Titicaca to Paqari Tambo by the
underground stream (Urton 1999:47). Comparing the two origin myths of the Incas and of the
Wankas, Pokcras, and Chankas reveals a comparison of Lake Choclococha to Lake Titicaca, and
a comparison of the three different nations of each group. The symmetry may hint that the Incas

67

used this myth to challenge the divine mandate and lineage of the W ankas, Pokcras, and
Chankas. Because the ancestors of the Incas had their origin in Lake Titicaca, a bigger and more
sacred lake than Lake Choclococha, the Incas themselves were better fit to rule and civilize.
With this justification, local cults were subsumed under the Inca religion and took a
second or third place in worship. The ethnic disruption of the Vilcashuaman region also affected
many aspects oflocal worship (Huertas 1983: XVI).
Idol capture
Capturing the idols or the ancestor mummies of the enemy to receive allegiance is a
strategy that pre-dates the Incas to at least the Middle Horizon 500 or so years before (Kolata
1993). As Vilcashuaman was a very important religious center for the Chankas, the capture of
the idols there by the Incas helped to ensure a firm hold over the area. Without their idols and
ancestor mummies, military morale was very low. Because the ancestor mummies were also the
lifelines of a people's identity, to capture them would be to capture the whole group. According
to Juan de Santa Cruz Pachacuti-Yamqui Salcamayhua, a desendant of principal chiefs of the
province of the Canas and Canches, Pachacutec conquered Vilcas and then captured the sacred
idols there:
He next marched to the country of the Chancas with fifty thousand men; and at Vilcashuaman he found seven huacas in the form of very great Curacas, black, and very ugly.
They were called Ayssa-vilca, Pariacaca, Chinchacocha, Huallallu Chuquiracra; and
two others of the Cafiaris. The prince took them and sent them to Cuzco, to work at the
Sacsahuaman fortress, and also afterwards to labour at the look-out towers on the seashore, at Chincha and Pachacamac. Then Pachacuti Ynca Yupanqui conquered the
provinces of the Angaraes, Chilqui-urpus, Rucanas, and Soras (Pachacuti-Yamqui 1873
[1613]: 93).
The Incas captured the idols of the Chankas and other groups, which allowed the Incas to make
the idols "work" for them. It is interesting to note that Pachacuti-Yamqui does not make a
distinction between the people and their huacas. The peoples who owed allegiance to these idols

68

had to obey the Incas and work for them in Cuzco. They were also incorporated into the army of
the Incas to conquer other provinces in the north (D'Altroy 1992: 81).

Discussion of strategies of control in Vilcashuaman-Pomatambo
It seems that the Incas chose to use very direct methods of control due to three main,
related reasons: the difficulty of co-opting the locals, the geographic importance of the area in
strategic and economic terms, and the sacred nature of the area to its former inhabitants. The
difficulty of using co-optation to pacify the locals was related to the geographic importance of
the area, which was both militarily and economically strategic. The Pampas River and the
surrounding high mountains naturally defend the Pampas River Basin, forming a huge natural
moat and wall around the basin. The volcanic geology of the area resulted in many mesa-topped
mountains hospitable for secure habitation and fortification (Baldeon Malpartida et al. 2005: 39).
The area was also a natural hub of many environmental zones and geological diversity.
Therefore, it was also a natural hub of economic activity for the different ethnic groups. For
example, the Quispisisa obsidian source, the source of over 90 percent of all obsidian artifacts in
the Peruvian Andes, was located only forty kilometers west ofVilcashuaman. The true extent of
the source probably extended even further outward, closer to Vilcashuaman (Burger et al. 2000:
258-265). The Vilcashuaman area was also the hub for access to salt to the north near
Huamanga and south in the pre-Inca province of Pomatambo

10

(Carabajal 1965 [1586]).

Additionally, it was the hub of gold, silver, copper, wool, and human labor sources (Carabajal
1965 [1586]; Monzon et al. 1965 [1586]; Monzon et al.b. 1965 [1586]). Because the area was

10

This Pomatambo is not the same as the Pomatambo in my study. This Pomatambo was located in what is now the
Province of Parinacochas in the department of Ayacucho. It was depopulated by Toledo's reducciones policy, and
no longer exists. It used to be the head of a large province by the same name in the pre-Inca days and encompassed
parts of modem day departments of Ayacucho, Apurimac, and Arequipa. In Guaman Poma's drawing of the battle
atop what is probably Pillucho, the Pomatambos fought alongside the other ethnic groups against the Inca.

69

such an important economic hub, many ethnic groups maneuvered and warred with each other
for control of parts of the area. It is not surprising, then, that the Incas met fierce resistance in
the area. To lose the geographical hub of so many important resources would have greatly
disadvantaged the various ethnic groups that had a stake in the area.
In order to secure the area, the Incas depopulated the inhabitants through war and
relocation and transplanted colonists from many different foreign ethnic groups there. The new
ethnic groups were kept in check by mutual mistrust and total dependence on the Inca state. The
old ties were broken to make way for new ties to the Inca state. The Incas, after an initial period
of militarily pacifying the area, sought to make the area a new economic, political, religious, and
military hub of the Inca Empire. Breaking the autonomy of this zone would have also disrupted
the natural economic exchanges between the different ethnic groups who formerly used the zone
as a hub. Thus, by deeply controlling a key zone, the Incas could significantly break the
economic might of the other ethnic groups they conquered.
The Incas also played on pre-existing antagonisms between the various ethnic groups
already in the area. As mentioned before, the Chankas conquered the Tanquihuas, and the Soras
and Lucanas had presence in the area for strategic purposes. It seems more than possible that the
Tanquihuas were the natives who helped the Incas conquer the area. It is also interesting to note
that Guaman Poma's depiction of the siege atop a Pucara (fortress) against the Incas did not
include the Tanquihua indians. Ironically, when the Incas later implemented the mitimaes
program and moved about a dozen other ethnic groups into the area, the Tanquihuas lost
whatever autonomy over the area they initially had right after the Incas drove out competing
ethnic groups.

70

The Incas constantly changed the landscapes, physical and imagined, of those they
conquered. However, the ways and speed in which they changed these landscapes depended on
many factors, including individual Incas' preferences. Because it is hard to speculate on the
internal reasons of those who left no written history, only the external reasons related to
economic, political, and military-strategic can be analyzed with any degree of certainty. From
the data concerning the Vilcashuaman area, it seems that the Incas chose to develop and integrate
centers of control first rather than control a contiguous territory and spread their territory of
control evenly from Cuzco. The Incas established points of control linked by roads, and these
points exerted their influence on the surrounding areas. Vilcashuaman seemed to be one such
center.
It seems that the Vilcashuam{m area was integrated more fully before other areas that

were closer to Cuzco because of its geographic-strategic importance. The evolution of imperial
control, from indirect to direct, seemed to happen at a much quicker pace at Vilcashuaman than
surrounding areas such as Lucanas and Soras. As said before, the reason why the people of the
actual provinces of Soras and Lucanas carmot remember any Inca emperor before Topa Inca,
even though according to historical sources, Pachacutec Inca conquered the region, may be
because it was not until Topa Inca (Tupac Inca, Thupa Inka) that the integration of the areas
surrounding the Vilcashuaman area happened. Schreiber' s (1987) study of the Carhuarazo
valley at Andamarca, Lucanas showed that the Incas did not integrate the area very much and did
not change much of the landscape or establish new roads. In fact, other than a few storage sites
and a religious site, there were relatively few signs of the state. Both the historical and the
archaeological evidence point to different rates of consolidation in different areas depending on
local factors. For the Vilcashuaman area, the transition from indirect to direct control seems to

71

have happened after the "Chanka" rebellion which led to a strong military presence in the area
which in turn led to a totally restructuring of the spatial and imagined landscapes of the
Vilcashuaman area. Old spatial relationships between population centers and imagined spatial
relationships between religious sites gave way to the new spatial and imagined spatial
relationships brought and developed by the Incas.

72

Chapter 4

BETWEEN THE SWORD AND THE WALL: MODERN
PERUVIAN STATE STRATEGIES OF CONTROL IN
POMATAMBO VILCASHUAMAN (1980-PRESENT)
Introduction
The intervening years between the fall of the Inca Empire in 1536 and the Shining Path
violence of the 1980s and 90s saw many changes in Peruvian society. Periodic rebellions against
the Spanish and insurgencies against the Peruvian state punctuated the political-historical
landscape. With the backdrop of these rebellions and insurgencies, the area that is now
Pomatambo slowly evolved into a recognized community.
In the early 17th century Pomatambo served as grazing grounds for the Rudas estate.
Sometime in the late 17th and early 18th century, Pomatambo became inhabited and started to
evolve into a community. Antonio de Alcedo recorded "Pomatambo" as a pueblo in the province
of Vilcashuaman in the mid 18th century (Alcedo 1967 [1786]: 173). In 1877, Pomatambo had
98 inhabitants (Felipe Paz 1877). By 1922, the population had grown modestly to 136 (Stiglich
th

1922). Until the early part of the 20 century, Pomatambo was part of a larger hacienda called
"Pomatambo y Vilcapucro (Q. Sacred Hollow)" until it fragmented into smaller properties
(Castillo Vilchez 1998: 4). In 1951 or 1952, Pomatambo was officially recognized as a
community. The population of Pomatambo peaked around the 1960s and 70s, with an estimated
population of300 (Webb 1996: 10).
Although there were numerous insurgencies in Ayacucho before the 1980s, none of them
affected the local populace of Pomatambo as deeply as the Shining Path violence. The modern
nature of warfare, the advances in technology, the bloody ideology of the Shining Path, and the

73

brutal counterinsurgency methods initially used by the army all contributed to a conflict that
affected the people on a very deep level. In the interviews, the general consensus was that the
Shining Path violence was the worst period in Pomatambo history. Most of the informants had
family members killed by both the Shining Path and the army. Due to the amount of data
available for analysis and the importance of such a tragic event in Peruvian history, the Shining
Path conflict serves as an ideal case study to examine the state methods of control in the modern
era.

Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to examine what strategies the state used to put down the
Shining Path insurgency in the immediate area around Pomatambo and Vilcashuaman, and what
strategies the state has used and is using to keep peace in the same area since the end of the
insurgency. I will trace the evolution of state tactics during several stages of the Shining Path
violence and show how those tactics affected the populations in question. I will show how the
desires of the community and the desires of the state interacted and interact to inform strategies
of keeping peace.

Origins
On May 17th , 1980, the eve of the first Peruvian democratic election in over a decade,
four masked men entered the ballot room in Chuschi, Ayacucho and burned the ballots stored for
election. Later that year, dogs were hung from lamp posts and traffic lights in Lima, Peru's
capital, with the accompanying signs which proclaimed, "Deng Xiao Ping

11

,

Son of a Bitch."

These two seemingly unrelated and innocuous events marked the begim1ing of a fifteen-year
11

Deng XiaoPing started the liberalizing reforms and opening up of China after the death of Mao ZeDong.

74

"People's War" that would result in nearly seventy thousand deaths and bring Peruvian
democracy to its knees. In the province ofVilcashuaman alone, more than 1300 people were
killed or disappeared, representing more than four percent of the population (Landa a11d Lopez
2005: 92).
The Shining Path found its beginnings at the Universidad Nacional San Cristobal de
Huamanga under Abimael Guzman Reynoso, a philosophy professor at the time. In 1959, the
university reopened after being closed since 1885. A group of professors signed up with
Guzman as the committee chair. Shining Path evolved from the clandestine Maoist Red Faction
started by Guzman (Ivan Degregori 1994: 52). Guzman was born in the town ofMollendo, south
of Lima into a comfortable middle-class family. He visited China several times during the
Cultural Revolution and was exposed to Maoist revolutionary practices and military training.
In 1968, a leftist military coup marked the beginning of Peru's only long-term military
government (1968-1980). Unlike most other leftist groups, the Shining Path actually vehemently
opposed the reform initiatives of the Velasco military regime (Palmer 1994: 2). The regime saw
itself as the chmnpion of the poor and the peasants, and initiated a rigorous agrarian reform
aimed at redistributing hacienda land, mnong other initiatives.
Ironically, it was the Velasco regime that consciously opened up space for leftist groups.
The regime left behind a legacy of popular mobilization from which the Shining Path sprung.
The Shining Path grew in a period of economic growth and government expansion (1963-1975).
They developed public education and rural development initiatives and deepened their power and
influence through the university power base. From the re-opening of the university onward, 7075 percent of the students enrolled were from Ayacucho, and many were from the rural areas.
These students were exposed to the increasingly influential Marxist and Maoist ideas in the

75

university. These ideas fonned a worldview that exalted their own class and ethnic origins, not
to mention give them practical training in assisting their own people. The first cadres of the
Shining Path hailed from these students (Palmer 1986: 138).
After Velasco was ousted by a coup in 1975, economic woes hit Peru and most reform
initiatives were either dropped or sharply curtailed. The combination of economic woes and
umesponsiveness of the state led to widespread unrest and rural sympathy for the overthrow of
the regime (Webb 1996: 58). The Communist Party amply exploited the political space
consciously left open for leftist groups under Velasco. The new political left was more able to
mobilize popular support than the govenunent as evidenced in the strikes of the late 1970s
organized by the Communist Party, which effectively shut down the government. Through
strikes and other political protest, the new left challenged not only the policies but also the core
legitimacy of the state apparatus and its accompanying economic system (Mauceri 1995: 15).
While the new left was challenging the state within the system through protest and electoral
activities, the Shining Path condemned them as sell outs and sought to challenge and topple the
state from outside the system.
After losing elections in the university in the mid 1970s, the Shining Path turned its back
on it and made no serious attempt to regain the lost positions. At this time, it formed popular
schools in the countryside and set up more bases of support there. It constantly denounced the
government and furthered its own agenda especially through teaching posts in rural and
provincial public schools. It was expelled from the Maoist movement in Peru and formally
began its armed struggle to topple the state as it transitioned to democratic rule (Palmer 1994: 2).
Ideologically, the Shining Path members believed themselves to be the true Marxists and
purists. They were a party built from the top down and ideology out. They toed the party line:

76

"The line decides everything (Ivan Degregori 1994: 54)." Most of their leaders came from
elsewhere, usually coastal urban settings. The opportunity to put their university learned
principles to practice in the countryside, with all of its rigors including learning Quechua, gave
these senderistas a sense of superiority to their fellow teachers, students, and even Marxist
colleagues who had not put their principles into practice in the rural areas. They believed that
they were the true vanguard of the rural proletariat (Palmer 1986: 138). Guzman and his Shining
Path saw themselves as the platform for a worldwide Marxist revolution.
On April 19'1\ 1980, a month before the first Shining Path public actions, Abimael
Guzman Reynoso delivered the famous "We Are the Initiators" speech close to the Shining
Path's First Military School. He started the speech with "We are the initiators. We must
recognize this deep in our souls. This is a historic meeting," and ends with, "The future lies in
guns and cannons! The armed revolution has begun! Glory to Marxist-Leninist-Mao Zedong
Thought! Let us initiate the armed struggle!"

12

The Shining Path instituted a "blood quota"

which requires a certain amount of blood to be spilled before the revolution, Peruvian and
worldwide, could succeed. A 1985 Shining Path manuscript explained the quota to the faithful:
About the quota: the stamp of commitment to our revolution, to world revolution, with
the blood of the people that runs in our country... Most [of the deaths] are caused by the reaction
[of the state] and fewer by us. They fill lakes while we only soak our handkerchiefs (Gorriti
2005: 340).
Another Shining Path document stated: "Blood makes us stronger and if it's this 'bath' that the
armed forces have made for us, the blood is flowing, it's not harming us but making us stronger
(Gorriti 2005: 340)." The quota glorified violence and bloodshed, because it was necessary to
give life to the revolution. The blood spilled would fertilize the ground for the seeds of

12

This speech appears in Luis Arca Borja, ed. Guerra Popular en el Peru (Brussels: Author, 1989) and was
translated by Orin Starn, Carlos Ivan Degregori, and Robin Kirk in Peru Reader (2005).

77

revolution. Death and its fascinating attraction held much sway over the senderistas as can be
seen in this anonymous ballad written by a senderista in 1984:
On the way out of Aucayacu
there's a body, who could it be?
Surely it's a peasant
Who gave his life for the struggle
... Today the quota must be filled
If we have to give our blood
for revolution, how good it will be (Gorriti 2005: 341).
And thus began chaqwa (Q. "Violent Disorder") and Manchay Tiempo (Q.+Sp. "Time of Fear")
that would grip Peru for the next fifteen or so years: Marxist-Leninist-Maoist ideology "purified"
in a bath of blood, peasant blood.
Strategies of state control in Pomatambo-Vilcashnaman
In this section, I will trace the evolution of strategies of control involving the suppression
of the Shining Path in the Pomatambo-Vilcashuaman area. The strategies could be characterized
thus:
Time Period

Strategy/ies Used

1980-1982

Neglect

1983-mid 80s

Aggressive counterinsurgency and military repression

mid 80s- l 990

Mix of repression and developmentalist approaches

1990-2000

Developmentalist approach combined with rondas campesinas

The graph below shows the intensity of violence through the number of locals dead from 19801997.

78

Vilcashuaman: dead and disappeared, 1980-1997
300
250

"'E 200

t5
.>

0 150

a;

.0

E

=>
z 100

50

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

Years

Source: Landa and Lopez 2005: 92
Early years (1980-1982)
In the early years, the Shining Path had much leeway to do what it wanted because the
state had very little presence in the areas where they were most active. The police then, as now,
had very little presence in the countryside. This was mainly due to the lack of interest in
developing the area and also the lack of paved roads. The city of Ayacucho was only finally
connected to the coast in the mid 1960s with the building of the Via de los Libertadores (Palmer
1986: 134). By the late 1980s, only 10 percent of all Peruvian roads were paved, most of them
on the coast and not in the highlands (Mauceri 1995: 12). Second of all, the Shining Path did not
participate in the leftist protests of the late 1970s, so they were low on the state's radar. Third of
all, the Shining Path did not start any military actions against the state in the province of

79

Vilcashuaman until the latter half of 1981 when they assassinated the mayor of Concepcion
district in Vilcashuaman (CVR 2003: 60).
The earliest violent actions taken by the Shining Path in the area were against hacienda
owners and not the state. It is important to note that the first violent actions taken by SL
(Shining Path) occurred near Pomatambo. Because SL believed that haciendas were
representatives of the old oppressive order, the presence of two of the five remaining functioning
medium-large sized haciendas in Cangallo province (which included Vilcashuaman before
1984) 13 made Pomatambo and its immediate zone a logical choice to initiate the armed
revolution against the old order.

In August of 1980, the Shining Path assassinated hacendado

Benigno Medina (CVR 2003: 60) in Pomatambo. Later that year, on Christmas Eve, they
assassinated the administrator of hacienda San Augustin de Ayzarca, near Pomatambo. After
torturing and killing the administrator of Ayzarca, they went on to attack other small haciendas
in the valley. In March of 1981, SL returned and dynamited the abandoned haciendas (Castillo
Vilchez 1998: 93). The haciendas in the area were very small-scale operations compared to
larger haciendas on the coast of Peru. The locals were not sufficiently oppressed by them to feel
liberated by SL assassinations, but rather apprehensive.
When SL first arrived in Pomatambo, they forced the villagers to meet and said that
everyone was going to work together and that the hacendados were going to disappear. Some of
the first actions of SL in Pomatambo included threatening and in some cases, killing authorities,
organizing the children to insult their parents, carrying out sunnnary executions of local thieves
and other miscreants, preventing local authorities from carrying out their duties, establishing
escuelas populares (Sp. "popular schools"), and holding regular meetings. SL would start village

13

The other haciendas were Ichocca, Rurunmarca, Vilcapucro (Pomatambo), Ayzarca (near Pomatambo), and
Occenay (CVR 2003: 28).

80

assemblies by invoking Marxist-Leninist-Maoist thought and then give talks (Castillo Vilchez
1998: 98). According to the local schoolteacher, when SL first arrived, they went from door to
door telling people that the authorities (of the state) were going to disappear. Initially, some of
the younger Pomatamban males supported SL because SL stressed the moderate vision of more
land to each peasant and more education. The females were generally apathetic, partly due to
being monolingual, for SL leaders were initially from the coast and spoke Spanish part of the
time (Webb 1996: 75).
As opposed to the killing of the hacendados, which did not garner either support or
opposition, the actions that did gain some initial sympathy for SL were the administering of
justice against a wife-beater and cattle thieves. However, this sympathy was quickly lost once
they started killing rich peasants that were not unpopular with their fellow villagers and had
strong kinship ties (Webb 1996: 71). Because Pomatambo was isolated at that time to strong
market forces outside, there was little class differentiation. What little economic disparity
existed was tempered by the richer peasants hosting festivals and engaging in community rituals.
Therefore, the rhetoric of class war did not resonate very much with Pomatambans (Webb 1996).
A little later, they started to take the initial administering of justice to extremes, which decreased
support among the villagers. Their punishments for petty crimes like cattle rustling would all be
executions, which was abhorrent to the villagers who believed in "punish but don't kill."
The local schoolteacher related an event when he received a note from SL telling him to
meet them on the outskirts of Pomatambo at 7pm. He went to the meeting shaking, unsure if
they were going to kill him. Once there, SL told him there was evidence of cattle rustling and
asked him to identify the perpetrators so they could execute them. The schoolteacher persuaded
them to hold off and give them another chance because the perpetrators were only poor peasants.

81

Later, the schoolteacher gathered about twenty of the peasants and warned them, and they were
grateful that he had convinced SL not to kill them. According to numerous informants, the
Shining Path may have been more moral than the armed forces, but they did not respect life and
freedom of opinion. If one did not want to cooperate with SL, they would execute. SL
prohibited religion and community rituals. In this way, many of the traditional authorities were
threatened and some even killed because they had occupied the political space that SL wanted to
control.
Not only did SL want to control the political space, it also wanted to control the
economic space of the village through limiting self-sufficient practices and mobility in and out of
the village to do petty trading. Some of the practices they wanted to abolish were the
decentralized household production of food and decentralized childrearing. They wanted to
collectivize these activities, which in tum was met by hostility by the women, as they saw these
efforts as encroachments to their power. The Shining Path had burned varas or staffs of office of
the traditional varayoq authorities in many of the villages. Pomatambo's vara escaped the fire
because the villagers had hidden it. Many, if not most, villagers resented the loss of freedom that
came with SL and went to great lengths to continue their commercial activities by taking
circuitous routes to Vilcashuaman's market and concealing cash in their shoes (Webb 1996:
104). The Shining Path wanted to cut off Pomatambo from the state and from traditional
authorities so that the villagers would depend on the Shining Path as the sole source of political
authority.
This period of state neglect was due to the isolation of Pomatarnbo and also SL attacking
hacendados, local authorities, and thieves, none of whom were state agents. The state had just
reverted to civilian control, so these events went under the radar. This period abruptly ended

82

with Shining Path's first attack on the state in Concepcion in July 1981. They had begun
assassinating authorities of the state instead of just incapacitating non-state traditional
authorities. They assassinated the mayor of Concepcion. On December 10, 1981, the national
government finally took notice and put under a state of emergency five of the seven Ayacucho
provinces: Huamanga, Huanta, Cangallo (including Vilcashuaman), La Mar, and Victor Fajardo.
Early next year, in March, the Shining Path launched an all out war against the meager state
police forces (the Civil Guard) in Vilcashuaman. President Bela(mde's visit to Vilcashuaman
near the end of March 1982 probably set off the beginning of the attacks. On March 26, 1982,
SL entered the hacienda Vilcashuaman and killed the owner. Five days later, on March 31, SL
launched an attack on the Civil Guard in Vilcashuaman. Later that year, on July 28, they
launched yet another attack. Less than a month later, on August 22, 1982, the Civil Guard and
the Municipality building were completely destroyed by SL, and seven policemen died in the
attack. Shortly after, the leader of the Civil Guard and the Minister of the Interior arrived to
assess the crisis in the Vilcashuaman area (CVR 2003: 30). With these bold actions, SL initiated
a period of immense suffering for the area, as the peasants became caught between SL and the
army.
Middle vears (1983-mid 1980s)
At the beginning of this period, the violence was concentrated in Ayacucho. However, as
the aggressive military counterinsurgency picked up, the Shining Path was prevented from
having permanent bases, and the violence spread to other parts of the country (Kent 1993: 445).
Around 1984-1985, the Shining Path established bases elsewhere in the highland Andes. A
comparison of the intensities of violence in different parts of Peru over time shows this
geographical migration of the most intense violence.

83

The armed forces tried to root out SL by establishing military bases at key points and
permanently headquartering in these relatively secure bases to prevent SL from taking full
control of the area. The closest base to Pomatarnbo was the one on the outskirts of
Vilcashuarnan (8.5 kilometers away). It was located about a kilometer west of the Vilcashuaman
plaza. It was located on a high plain from which it could see Vilcashuaman and westward easily.
Other military bases in the province were in Concepcion (13.5 kilometers away), Huarnbalpa
(12.5 kilometers away), and Vischongo (19 kilometers away) (Figure 10) (CVR 2003: 30-38, 5253). The military bases formed a clamp around the SL encampments to the east.

Figure 10: Military bases in Vilcashuaman province during SL violence.

Interestingly, the base at Vilcashuarnan was situated near a road navigable only on foot,
for vehicles could not easily handle the uphill climb from Vilcashuaman. This was probably to
control the movements of SL into Vilcashuaman, since SL relied on foot traffic. With the strong

84

presence of the armed forces in the area, SL could no longer move about freely and only dared to
do so at night, when the armed forces did not move. The types of transport that the armed forces
used were trucks and helicopters, which are dangerous to navigate in the pitch darkness.
Although the aggressive counterinsurgency led to the migration of the main fronts of SL,
SL's presence in the area was far from eradicated. Violence reached its highest levels at the end
of this period, as SL fought to keep their bases of control, and the armed forces swooped into
these areas and killed SL cadres. The army also broke their permanent bases of control through
the indiscriminate killing of peasants. These acts instilled fear into the populace and made them
even more reluctant to help SL, knowing that SL would abandon them to the onslaught of the
armed forces by day. It was a lose-lose situation for peasants, as they were accused of being
collaborators on both sides. One Pomatambo informant told me, "La comunidad no sabia con
quien confiar." The community did not know whom to trust. During the violence, a Pomatamban
couple was accused of being army informants. SL came into their house at night and shot them
in front of their children, leaving orphans.
This was a very traumatic time for the villagers, as trust between villagers declined
drastically, the traditional rituals were suppressed, and the number of dead soared. Very
conservatively, seventeen Pomatambans died as a direct result of the violence, representing at
least five or six percent of the total population at the time. I estimate that the total number of
Pomatambans killed probably approached ten percent of the population. This was a time of
chaos, as the armed forces swept in during the day and SL swooped in during the night. This
was also the time when the villagers covered up the cave atop Aya Orqo in fear of the military
disappearing people into it. After 1983, the initial leaders of SL moved to the new fronts of the
conflict outside of Ayacucho, leaving new and inexperienced cadres in charge. According to

85

Castillo Vilchez, a native of Pomatambo, the lack of restraint shown by SL toward the peasants
was due to the old leaders moving to the new fronts. Many of these new leaders would
indiscriminately kill peasants, often to resolve age-old grudges and carry out revenge (Castillo
Vilchez 1998: 90).
By the end of 1985, the vast majority of the old SL leaders had moved to the new fronts,
and the worst violence was over in the area. However, in the more isolated areas of
Vilcashuaman province, there was residual SL presence. This was when the state committed the
worst massacres against civilians in the more isolated areas. In a push to purge the area of SL,
the armed forces killed indiscriminately. It did not help that a significant portion of them came
from the coast, where dominant stereotypes existed about the highlanders being terrorists, dirty
and ignorant (Starn et al. 2005: 357). In a memoir of a soldier who fought against SL, he said
"To be straight with you, the cholo 14 is like an animal for me ... He does it, and then he sleeps"
(Stam et al. 2005: 361). In late 1985 through 1986, some of the most tragic incidents happened
in the more isolated peasant communities near SL encampments. In Accomarca on August 14,
1985, the army shot and killed sixty-nine villagers. In Bellavista and Umaro on August 28,
1985, the army detained a number of villagers and then shot dead 59 of them as they tried to
escape (CVR 2003: 61). The general responsible for these actions, Telmo Hurtado, is now
wanted as a war criminal.
In October of 1986, disaster struck Pomatambo, Parcco, and Pujas. On October 8, as the
villagers of Pujas were celebrating their fiesta patronal outside, an army helicopter came and
shot dead thirty-two villagers. Very soon after, on the night of October 22, the army committed
one of the worst atrocities during the violence at Pomatambo. It was around 7:30 P.M. when it

14

Derogatory term used for mestizos or Indians wanting to be white. Here, it is used against all peasants in the

highland Andes.

86

happened. The village authorities were making chicha, the traditional fermented corn drink, in
preparation for a sports event. Soldiers entered and were offered chicha. All was fine until there
was some commotion in the plaza outside. The soldiers turned on their flashlights to find a
senderista entering the plaza half-drunk on a horse. Machine gun shots rang out and the horse
thrashed about injured. The soldiers captured the senderista to torture and interrogate him, but
the senderista remained mute. Perhaps in frustration at the senderista's uncooperativeness, the
soldiers hauled all the Pomatamban authorities out of the communal house and beat them. They
were taken prisoner and marched toward Huaccafia and then to Parcco, the direction from which
the senderista came. The prisoners arrived at Parcco 5 A.M. the next morning in a very bad state
from cuts and beating. The soldiers took more prisoners at Parcco and shot two octogenarians in
their bed. After two more hours of interrogating the prisoners of Pomatambo and Parcco, the
soldiers took the prisoners out to the square one by one and hacked and shot them to death. Then
they burned their bodies and threw them down a ravine, where they were found later (Castillo
Vilchez 1998: 103-105).

It is not surprising that villagers were very disaffected with both SL and the army. While
the aggressive counterinsurgency decreased violence near the centers in Ayacucho like
Vilcashuaman, it increased violence in the outskirts where it was harder for the army to get to.
The army first concentrated on controlling the centers by putting bases there and then extended
their purges outward in the direction of SL encampments at Umaro, Mayupampa, Huamanmarca,
Parqocucho, and Lloqllapampa (CVR 2003: 55), leaving a trail of destruction behind.
The exodus years (mid l 980s-l 990)
After the Pomatambo massacre of 1986, the exodus from Pomatambo accelerated greatly.
By 1993, the population had declined from around 300 to 188 (INEI 1993). The provinces of

87

Cangallo and Vilcashuaman had the worst depopulation during the violence of all of Ayacucho,
losing nearly half of the population (CVR 2003). Vilcashuaman province itselflost a third of its
population from 1981 to 1993 (Gamarra Guillen 1998: 40). The number of dead and disappeared
reached a low point during this time, but they were still frequent as the army swept over the area
periodically disappearing people they suspected of being collaborators. By this time, the number
of senderistas in the area probably did not exceed one hundred and were confined to the
extremely isolated areas to the east and south banks of the Pampas River, where it was
impossible for vehicles to travel and dangerous for helicopters to fly. Because the military bases
were located often more than a day's round-trip walk from these hideouts, and not to mention the
extremely difficult landscape and gasping high altitude, SL maintained a diminished although
tenacious presence in the area. The most intense SL violence was stepped up in urban areas like
Ayacucho and Lima.
In the national context, the military had been ineffectually alternating between the
Argentine "repressive" approach and the "developmentalist" approach, which emphasized the
need for economic development in the countryside (Mauceri 1995: 25). From 1982, the military
was in charge of designing counterinsurgency strategy, but it was highly fragmented due to the
differing opinions inside the military on which strand of strategy, repressive or developmentalist,
was most effective in countering SL (Mauceri 1995: 25). The effectiveness and the character of
counterinsurgency depended on the individual general in charge of a specific area, and gains
made against SL could be as quickly lost due to change in leadership. For example, initially in
the Upper Huallaga valley, the counterinsurgency was very successful due to a combination of
good counterinsurgency and astute political tactics. The military had a working knowledge of
political geography: they would pursue the insurgents aggressively, cut off and control the

88

mountain escape routes, and made it clear to the locals that they were only after SL and not the
coca-farming peasants or the drug traffickers. This way, they were able to control the
movements of SL and severely limit their effectiveness by undercutting local support. However,
these gains were quickly lost with the change in military leadership (Gonzalez 1994: 134-135).
In the Pomatambo-Vilcashuaman area, the military leadership was inept so the presence
of SL was never completely destroyed. The indiscriminate killing of peasants did not help the
state's cause, as some people took up arms with SL to avenge family members killed. The
unwillingness of the military to establish permanent encampments in the remote areas where SL
had its presence also prolonged the violence, which caught the peasants in between. The small
populations of the villages also prevented them from getting a permanent army or police station
to protect the local populace from SL's presence at night. In the late 1980s and early nineties,
the requests by peasants for garrisons to be established in their villages skyrocketed (Starn 1995:
562), but the smaller villages like Pomatambo were rarely if ever accommodated with one.
Furthermore, the lower numbers of people dead during this era may be partly due to the massive
migration to the cities, especially Ayacucho. In effect, the absolute number of dead may have
been lower but the ratio may still have been comparable. The smaller rural communities were
still effectively ignored by the state, prolonging the suffering from SL and state alike.
Later years: Rondas and Rounding up the Shining Path (1990-2000)
Since the beginning of the violence, Peru had gone through two ineffectual presidencies,
Belaunde and Garcia. Under Garcia, inflation had reached 1700 percent. Real wages in 1989
were half of what they were in 1980, which in turn were half of what they had been in the mid1970s. In effect, people on average were four times poorer in 1989 than in the mid-1970s.
(Mauceri 1995: 26). By the end of the decade, Peru no longer had any international credit due to

89

its inability to pay off the massive amount of foreign debt accumulated on top of the fifteen
billion dollars spent on the counterinsurgency (Mauceri 1995: 25).
When it came time for elections in 1990, the people of Peru picked the political unknown
Alberto Fujimori, an agronomist by trade. He is generally credited with the breaking of SL
because he centralized the intelligence services and the military strategy, in addition to using
developmentalist approaches to gain popular support. To further his objectives and consolidate
power, he staged a "self-coup" against the legislature in 1992, bringing an end to the twelve
years of turbulent civilian rule. Many of the practices he used against SL were already in
existence, but were not centralized. To solve the problem of multiple counterinsurgency
strategies within the institution, he reconstructed the military and kept only the personnel that
agreed with him. He used troops to carry out state actions that were once the responsibilities of
the ineffectual police: distribute food, obliterate SL graffiti, maintain public order, assert state
authority, guard prisons, and accompany tax collectors (Mauceri 1995: 20). His policy of the
expansion of military role to policing and organizing social groups to fight against SL was
vigorously pursued.
Although both strategies were pursued during Bela(mde and Garcia's tenures to a limited
extent, Fujimori made them the centerpiece of his administration (Mauceri 1995: 24). On the
ground, this policy worked nicely with the increase of soldiers recruited from the highlands
instead of the coastal areas in the late 1980s. This created new ties between the peasantry and
the army, and contributed to a partial shift of the military's image "from occupiers to protectors
(Starn 1995: 562)." This convergence reflected a change in tone of state policy. Finally, the
state became somewhat engaged with the rural populace in a positive fashion. Furthermore, this
undercut some of the legitimacy SL had in the rural areas.

90

Perhaps the most effective social program extensively developed and encouraged during
Fujimori's tenure was the rondas campesinas, self-defense committees established in the
countryside and shantytowns. These rondas have their origins in totally autonomous rondas
created by villagers in the north of Peru. These rondas were so successful in impeding SL that
the rondas were self-organized with little prodding from the Peruvian military (Starn 1995: 563).
Even though the peasants were supplied with simple rifles, the level of impotence felt by the
peasants greatly diminished with their newfound ability to defend themselves. The military
established rondas among peasants in Vilcashuaman in 1993 to have a permanent resistance
against SL there (Starn 1995: 563). The rondas were being used at least until 1996 in the
Vilcashuaman area. It also helped that in 1992, Abimael Guzman was captured in Lima along
with documents identifying the main leaders of SL. A government crackdown shortly after
decapitated the leadership of SL and extremely limited their potency. Guzman, who has asthma,
could not hide out in the remote highlands and hid out in Lima instead. Ironically, this
geographical limitation contributed to SL's downfall.
Fujimori also emphasized rural development programs on the ground. He improved
roads, built water systems, established schools, and distributed food aid to the villages in
Vilcashuaman, garnering much popular support. These programs effectively destroyed whatever
sympathy was left for SL, who never delivered to the villagers such programs. In my surveys,
two of the men, ages 26 and 21, cited the Fujimori era as the best in Pomatamban history because
he stopped the terrorism, provided aid, and established the schools. A 74 year old said that
Fujimori was better than Belaunde and Garcia because he actually visited the area and gave it
some much needed development. Another man, who looks like he is in his thirties, said that he
respects Fujimori because he stopped the terrorism and provided work for the countryside (in the

91

rural development projects). According to an expatriate of Pomatambo, a small portion of
Pomatambans want Fujimori back because he provided visible benefits to the countryside:
reforestation, schools, potable water, and so on. Only one Pomatamban interviewed had
explicitly negative views about Fujimori. He was in his mid to late forties and remembers that
things got worse under Fujimori because he had closed down and privatized the factories. As
with their experiences with the Shining Path, Pomatambans do not decouple political ideology
from actions. During the latter part of his presidency, some people even migrated back to the
area.
By 1998, there was virtually no SL activity in Vilcashuaman province, and SL itself
retreated to the eastern jungles greatly diminished in numbers. However, the years of violence
had left their toll on the psychologies and the social connections of people in the area.
Alcoholism and its accompanying social problems such as domestic abuse increased greatly.
Trust between villagers decreased greatly, and the traditional authorities no longer existed. The
Shining Path and the trauma that resulted from the violence had destroyed the varayoq system
and greatly diminished the traditional reciprocity practices of ayni and minka. Ayni is reciprocity
of labor between individuals, and minka is reciprocity between an individual and a group of
individuals mobilized for a certain project, such as house-building. Pomatambo had also become
dependent on food aid from the Fujimori administration, which cut into the necessity of having

ayni and minka (Webb 1996: 112). Contact with outside became much more systematic and
frequent, and the repairing of the road in 1996 allowed vehicle traffic to come into Pomatambo.
James Scott wrote that war, revolution, and economic collapse often radically weaken civil
society as well as malce the populace more receptive to new ideologies and social structures
(Scott 1998: 5). Certainly, the years of violence greatly weakened civil society in Pomatambo

92

and its surrounding area. It has also made the community more receptive to changes than before
the violence.
Despite the generally positive views of Fujimori in Pomatambo, in the national context,
Fujimori' s strongest supporters were ironically the military, international financial agencies, and
domestic business groups, hardly the traditional allies of the poor peasants (Mauceri 1995: 18).
Fujimori and supporters forged a neo-liberal state-rebuilding project that emphasized a reduction
in the state's direct role in productive functions through privatization, undercutting labor and
actually increasing the state's power in the economy (Mauceri 1995: 28). All ofFujimori's
actions, the increased militarization, developmentalist policies in the countryside, self-coup, and
increased authoritarianism, served to further the neoliberal agenda by strengthening the state
against autonomous resistance:
Fujimori's 'autogolpe' of April 1992 was the culminating response of an attempt to
restructure the state and its relations with society through a combination of neoliberal
economic reforms and authoritarian political methods. These efforts have been supported
by a coalition of interests-including the technocratic elites, the military, business, and
the international financial community-that coalesced around Fujimori to reverse the
structural decline in state capabilities taking place in Peru for over a decade. Although
each of these groups has its own agenda, the logic underlying the coalition and the
administration it supports has been the necessity of strengthening the state in the areas
required to carry out a neoliberal modernization of the economy and society (Mauceri
1995: 32).
The economic effects of these policies on Pomatambo were the increased dependence on cash
and less self-sufficiency. The dependence on cash and the out-migration of the men to acquire it
meant the decreasing importance of women's roles in bartering, agriculture, and ritual
preparation of food and drink. It also decreased the necessity of the community to survive in the
harsh Andean world. It is important to note that the Pomatambans who expressed positive views
ofFujimori were men and not women. Even something as seemingly positive as better education
is a double-edged sword due to the content of what is taught. Anthropologist Babb points out

93

that many Peruvian women resent the school system for usurping their traditional importance in
the education of children and propagating a mestizo ideology of gender and hierarchy (Babb
1985: 191). The establishment of secondary schools outside of Pomatambo means that there is an
out-migration of teenagers to Pujas and Vilcashuaman. According to the local nurse, this creates
a lot of social problems because the teenagers rent rooms and live together with no parental
supervision. Teen pregnancy has become a serious problem in the past decade in the area.
Another policy pursued by the state during this time was a sterilization program for rural
women. There has been much controversy over the practice, and some estimate that up to
200,000 rural women were sterilized by the state, mostly against their will (BBC 2002). Women
in rural villages like Pomatambo might see this as yet another encroachment of the state into
their lives. These changes reflect a growing dependence on the state rather than the community.
As a result ofFujimori's agenda to strengthen the national government, the state became more
capable in delivering services and enforcing authority. This increase in state capacity also gave
the state more economic and social leverage over rural communities.
Pomatambo and the Peruvian state today (200 I-Present)
In 2000, Fujimori began his third term as president after circumventing the constitutional
limit of two. However, a series of corruption scandals forced him out of office soon after. The
next year, the first relatively fair presidential elections were held. The man elected was
Alejandro Toledo, of humble origins and native appearance. In the next five years, Peru's
economy grew by about five percent a year. Despite this growth, the state was still viewed as
illegitimate by most Peruvians, and Toledo at one point had the lowest approval rating in all of
Latin America: 9 percent (Emery 2005).

94

At the Vilcashuaman provincial level, state-society relations were changing in some
important ways, and its isolated and neglected days were over. With the involvement ofNGOs,
local government officials, and the local community leaders, a dynamic dialectic between rival
development visions played out at Vilcashuaman. Both visions seek to lessen the effects of SL
violence and to prevent something like it from occurring in the future. The first vision falls into
the Fujimori camp: decentralization oflocal political and economic power and centralization of
national state power. The decentralization includes privatization of land by communities and
individuals, and the centralization involves connecting the Vilcashuaman area into the national
economic and political system. In effect, the area would be less likely to rebel because there
would be less local political autonomy in the peasant communities and more dependence on the
state government and economy to survive.
The second vision stresses democratic involvement with the local communities and
engaging with the local traditions and culture, integrating the technological advantages of
development with a respect for the local culture and customs. Under this vision, the area would
be less likely to rebel because the state would become democratically responsive to local wishes
and respect the values of the communities. Furthermore, an emphasis on reviving cultural
practices through government facilitation and education would strengthen both state legitimacy
and local capacity to resist "foreign" ideologies like the anti-tradition ones espoused by the
Shining Path.
Both visions stress decentralization of some sort, education, road building, tourism,
involvement with NGOs, and bringing modern technology to the area. However, the purposes
behind these common general methods are very different. The main difference between these
two visions is what role they see peasantry in having in the future. The first vision sees a

95

minimized role or a greatly changed role. The second vision sees a maximized role in terms of
cultural renaissance and restoration of economic viability of the area without a drastic change in
local values. Both visions welcome development and change. Some of the programs each
emphasize overlap, but a mechanism is only secondary to the purpose. What are some of the
specifics of each vision, and how is Pomatambo affected?
First Vision
In my experience, the mayor of Vilcashuaman and the government agricultural program
PRONAMACHS reflect the ideals of the first vision. They both expressed distaste for peasant
values and autonomy, and favored decentralization of power to the lowest official level but
above the community level. The mayor, Otto Castro Mendoza, was born in Vilcashuaman but
spent three years in Lima from 1989 to 1992. He said that the most difficult aspect of his job has
been to change and put good sense in the backward peasants who resist change. He says,
" ... [N]o quieren cambiar en si mismos, no son progresistas, no tienen vision, no han viajado ... "
They don't want to change themselves, they are not progressive, they don't have vision, they
have not traveled. He said that it was difficult to develop the people. He has a fairly negative
view of community customs: " ... [E]stan acostumbrados a la ociosidad, trabajan s6lo entre las 11
y las 3 cada dia, deben trabajar mas, deben captar mayores recursos para sus familias, no s6lo
para autoconsumo." They are accustomed to laziness, they work only between 11 and 3 each day,
they need to work more, they should acquire more resources for their families and not just for
subsistence. The reality is that the peasants actually work from seven or eight in the morning to
until an hour before sunset.
Regarding policies, the mayor says his main contributions have been in educational
infrastructure, which is consistent with his belief that the biggest challenge is to change the

96

"backward" values of the peasants. He also favors other infrastructure: water, electricity, and
employment. He says that the local population does not currently pay for water and electricity,
and that this is bad because the habit of getting things free needs to be changed. Taxes would
also give the local government more power over the rural communities. He believes that the
state should clearly recognize private land titles because that would allow speculation and the
increase in land values. Without these titles, he says, the people only want to sit on their land
and subsist. He also says, somewhat wishfully, that the minka was formerly the mode of work,
but now all people want to get paid. This is factually incorrect, as the rural communities and
even people in the town Vilcashuaman still regularly employ minka, although less frequently
than before the 1980s.
He favors trade-led rural development of rural areas and the exportation of agricultural
goods internationally. In order for that to happen, he says, the free trade treaty needs to be
ratified and agriculture mechanized. He also believes that tourism and agriculture could work
together to develop the area. The development of mechanized agriculture would increase
productivity, and the development of infrastructure (hotels, asphalted roads, good restaurants,
internet access, etc) would encourage tourism. Most of his support, he says, comes from the
urban areas. His views and the power he has show the influence of the first vision in the
governmental policies of Vilcashuaman.
Other governmental programs like PRONAMACHS (Programa Nacional de Manejo de
Cuencas Hidrograficas y Conservaci6n de Suelos) and JUNTOS reflect more of the first vision
than the second. PRONAMACHS's purpose is to improve agricultural yield and efficiency
through teaching peasants more efficient agricultural methods, methods of conserving soil, and
irrigation methods; it has a project MIMA-POMATAMBO in the Vilcashuaman area . .JUNTOS

97

is a social program which gives 100 soles a month (U.S. $31) to rural women in exchange for the
women meeting specific goals each month (keeping children in school, etc).
PRONAMACHS attitude toward peasants was very evident in a 2006 PRONAMACHS
report of the impact of the MIMA-POMATAMBO program (2000-present). Despite the reported
misgivings of the peasants about the program, PRONAMA CHS still insisted that the failures
were not due to themselves. The general consensus of the villagers was that PRONAMACHS
did not deliver the promised technical aid, had little rapport with the villagers, gave confusing
technical advice, and sold equipment to the villagers that was overpriced relative to the market.
They surveyed ten peasants from each of the eleven communities in the Pomatambo river basin.
Despite the claims given by the villagers, PRONAMACHS attributed MIMA-POMATAMBO's
lack of success to the peasants' passivity, poor organization, lack of dynamism, and having no
market outlet to encourage production. PRONAMACHS often complained about the lack of
respect and trust they got from the villagers (PRONAMACHS 2006). PRONAMACHS is part
of a larger strategy by the government to advance agricultural techniques, and in the case of
MIMA-POMATAMBO, without regard to the complaints by peasants.
Although JUNTOS was welcomed by several women in Pomatarnbo, our research
assistant remarked that up until recently, the women had to travel to Huamanga, a five hour van
ride away, to collect the money. Sometimes, the long lines would force them to stay overnight
there. Because it costs 24 soles round trip, plus hotel fees, most of the I 00 soles given per month
had been wasted on transportation to and from Huarnanga. While I was in Vilcashuaman, they
allowed women from the local communities to collect the money in Vilcashuarnan. At the end
of each month, the women would wait in a line three blocks long to collect the money.
Certainly, the program brings much needed economic aid to the women, and enables them to buy

98

necessities for their children like shoes. However, it also makes them more dependent on the
state through the growing importance of cash and governmental institutions like the bank.
Another effect is that they depend less on the community to provide the necessities for survival.
Our research assistant remarked that 100 soles a month is not very much, and that the money
could be spent more efficiently on infrastructure aimed at helping these women.
Second vision

The second vision has many of the same methods as the first: actively utilizing
governmental agencies, NGOs, favoring decentralization, opening up the area to some form of
global market, and improving education. However, the tone and purpose of the methods used are
markedly different from the first vision. For one thing, the agents that subscribe to this vision
tend to value traditional culture and see it as the starting point to meaningful development. The
people who subscribe to this vision have revived the varayoq system, are involved with reviving
traditional artisan skills, stress the importance of education infused with respect for their own
culture, and see small local businesses as a way to bring economic support and dignity for the
war-torn area. They stress that the strengthening of traditional authorities like the varayoqs and
incorporating them into the official state apparatus combined with an education that arms the
young vulnerable minds with toolkits to resist dangerous ideologies. It is a very productive way
of preserving their valuable culture and keeping peace at the same time. It also gives an
ethnographic element to tourism, instead of just focusing on archaeological sites. Maria
Gutierrez and the NGO Chirapaq are examples of this second vision. Generally, these people
find their support in the rural areas.
Maria Gutierrez is a local politician who served as gobernadora ofVilcashuaman
province from 2002 to 2004. A charming woman in her 50s, her role was to implement laws

99

from above and was similar to that of a chief law enforcement official. She was born in
Vilcashuaman but lived in Huamanga (Ayacucho) for 29 years. She came back because of her
aged parents and because her husband retired. She has been involved in politics for only four
years. She stresses the importance ofreviving the customs of the area, as she sees them as an
invaluable economic, cultural, and political asset for the better welfare of the people. Her way of
carrying herself was very different than the mayor, Otto Castro Mendoza. Instead of
interviewing her in her office, she came outside to speak to us, frequently greeting and talking to
the locals in Quechua.
After the interview, she went to her local community Estancia Pata to celebrate a fiesta
and to carry out her "cargo" or duty contributing to the fiesta. She says, "Nuestras comunidades
han perdido sus costumbres." Our communities have lost their customs. She is very keen on
reviving them to restore dignity to her people. In fact, she was the main governmental actor in
the revival of the varayoq (traditional authority) system in Vilcashuaman province. She saw the
revival as a good way to counter the problems of petty crime, domestic abuse, and alcoholism in
the communities. During her tenure as gobernadora, she began working with the older
generation because she felt she could rely on them and their customs as a resource and not as a
setback. She said that most people in Vilcashuaman applauded her for the revival, and the new

varayoqs from the different communities had a varayoq parade in Vilcashuaman to show their
solidarity.
In addition to reviving and making the varayoq system officially recognized by the state,
Marfa Gutierrez applauds the work that NGOs have done in combating domestic abuse and
alcoholism. After the violence, more and more distilled alcohol was drunk instead of the milder
chicha prepared locally. The potency of the new alcohol combined with the trauma that resulted

100

from SL violence led to a very serious alcoholism problem in the area. Maria Gutierrez cites
alcoholism as the most difficult problem she is faced with. She also respects JUNTOS for
enabling destitute women. To revive the economy of the area, she also believes that traditional
customs could play a seminal role. She believes that the lost artisan skills need to be revived so
that the economy could be diversified, and that the people could be more self-sufficient and
acquire capital more easily, without losing any dignity and love for their own culture.
To achieve these goals, she believed that block grants from the govermnent with no
strings attached could be a very good solution. This way, the local people could resolve their
own problems through the democratic political system. Maria Gutierrez seemed to have a lot of
faith in the political system, seeing it as a source of liberation rather than oppression. Despite
her optimism, she told us that the future of the community would depend on who was in power.
She says that sometimes subsequent officeholders undo previous good works. This brings us
back to Otto Castro Mendoza, who seemed to be against Maria Gutierrez, even denying she had
any role in the revival of the varayoq system and telling us that she was not around. The clash of
the two visions is very real, and the future of the community in Vilcashuaman will depend on
who is in power. Naturally, one would think that in a democratic electoral system, the people
decide. However, because the electoral laws are written so that a party with only 15 percent of
the total votes could win all the seats in local government, the system clearly favors the first
vision. It is a winner-take-all system where the party with the biggest absolute number of votes
wins all the seats. Currently, the party in power is the same party as former presidential
candidate Lourdes Flores, supporting business and urban development. This is paradoxical
because the party had only won about 15 percent of the total votes.

101

Chirapaq is yet another example of the second vision. A woman from Pujas who wanted
to help the community founded it in 1986. It is largely funded by its own resources and aid from
the Netherlands. It has a variety of programs under its wing, but emphasizes continuing the
tradition of crafts through elders teaching in the schools and a strong respect for Andean cultures.
A representative from Chirapaq visited Pomatambo while we were there and talked with the
local leaders about a new crafts program aimed at teaching children ceramic and art skills. The
man told us that Chirapaq programs are started literally by biking to a community and talking
with the neglected elders there. He described going to a fiesta and buying coca leaves to talk to
the elders sitting in the corner of the plaza. The organization aims to have international ties
through the export of locally made crafts. By doing this, local people, especially the young,
could have a diversified economic base. It might also lessen the exodus of the young into the
cities by providing reasonable paying jobs. This is crucial to the survival of these communities,
as the age distributions are very skewed by the low numbers of young people. Young people are
needed to continue the community traditions, participate in the minkas and other community
projects, and giving dynamism and vigor to the community.
Other government policies that are neutral by themselves but could be used for either
vision are the identification cards, which are mandatory and necessary for voting and receiving
any health benefits, road building, electrification, and water infrastructure.
Whereas the first vision seeks to consolidate state control through the destruction of
peasant civil society, the second vision sees increased state capacity as a means to revive the
civil society badly damaged by the violence. James Scott in his Seeing like a State wrote that it
had always been part of the state project to increase state capacity through making society more
"legible" or accessible to state intervention. Most of the legibility state projects were the same as

102

espoused by the first vision: large commercial establishments, modern agriculture, private land
titles, standardized education as opposed to informal education, and taxation (Scott 1998: 219220). This comes as no surprise because the first vision abstracts out what they believe is
important, and what they believe is important does not include local peasant cultures and
political structures. Scott noted that peasants represented autonomous complex settlement
patterns and social networks that had a logic far deeper than any factory floor, making state
projects that solely focused on maximizing raw economic output hard to carry out. In Russia,
"[ o]ne purpose of collectivization was to destroy these economic and social units, which were
hostile to state control, and to force the peasantry into an institutional straitjacket of the state's
devising ... Given the quasi-civil war conditions of the countryside, the solution was as much of a
product of military occupation and 'pacification' as of' socialist transformation (219). "'
The same kind of thinking is happening in Vilcashuam{m. Because the local economic
and political structures are not optimal for the first vision's goals, the peasantry needs to be
changed drastically to fit the goals. The second vision values local customs and cultures as one
of the most important resources. Therefore, increased state capacity is a means to the
preservation of peasant values and dignity.

103

Chapter 5

POMATAMBAN RESPONSES AND TRENDS
Introductiou

So far, we have looked at the top-down implications of the two visions. However, as
Nugent (1994) perspicaciously noted, the traditional oppositional model of the state always
working to erode the community and the community always purposefully isolating itself from
the negatives state belies the richer reality. The community is seen as a passive and defensive
entity, whereas the state is seen as an active and offensive one. Missing from this model is "any
sense of the mutual interdependence of concrete forms of state and community, of how each
helps to create, construct, and enable (or not enable) the other according to specific materialpolitical interests and cultural conceptions that are contingent in time and space." There are
many contexts in which states and communities, national and local identities, coexist peacefully
and in mutual support of one another, in effect mutually constructing each other (Nugent 1994:
336). Increased state capacity by itself is neutral; it is what the purposes are that determines
what changes happen (Scott 1998: 78). With Nugent's and Scott's qualifications in mind, we
can look at the mutual dependence of the top-down and bottom-up manifestations of the two
visions: How have the policies enacted by the two different visions affected the views of
Pomatambans? What is the role of a community like Pomatambo in directing the goals of the
state and the process of increased state capacity?

Pomatamban responses

The interview and survey results paint a general picture of Pomatambans feeling that the
government should do more for them. They are reaching out to the state, especially at the
104

Vilcashuaman provincial level where they think the community could get the most. Most
informants did not discriminate between PRONAMACHS and Chirapaq, often mentioning both
of them as having done positive things for Pomatambo recently. They see the improvement of
the roads as vital, allowing them easy access to Vilcashuaman, where Pomatambans go to pick
up JUNTOS checks every month and go for market every Tuesday.
Among almost all of the informants, awareness of the different visions is lacking. If
certain programs do not benefit or pertain to the informant, they usually say that the government
has done nothing, despite the numerous activities. Many people, especially among the older
cohort, applaud the revival of the varayoq system. The first two varayoqs elected after the
violence all expressed optimism and confidence in the renewed importance of the post. In short,
the views of the Pomatambans are dependent on the specific benefits or disadvantages posed by
governmental activities, and not on the ultimate state purpose of those activities. Despite
differing agendas, the organic interaction between the community members, the state, and NGOs
has created a dynamic that strengthens community identification and at the same time weakens
concrete community social ties. This seeming paradox is revealed by the survey results patterns
concerning identification and political trust. The trends might reflect a nascent creation of
national identity. Furthermore, the trends hint at larger processes in the Peruvian economy.
The surveys were done to gauge the effects of increased exposure to the state apparatus,
especially in education and time spent negotiating the bureaucracy. The infrastructure that
makes the increased contact with the state possible is primarily the roads and radios. The
economic trend of out-migration of the young also increases state contact with the Pomatambans
because their relatives send money to them and visit during certain times of the year. The
surveys help put in context the two visions of state control. While the number of responses for

105

some of the questions was low, the general impression is what is important. The survey results
are consistent with the informal interviewing that occurred before and after each survey.
Male vs. Female political trust and identification levels
Men strongly prefer to trust authorities in Pomatambo and Vilcashuaman over outsiders.
Women are less consistent but peak at the Pomatambo level or express apathy or neutrality. This
may reflect a couple of things. First, in traditional Pomatamban society, women are not publicly
involved in politics even though they may have strong indirect influence. Second, Pomatamban
women tend to be non-committal in their answers, perhaps reflecting wariness of outsiders,
especially in light of the Shining Path episode. Remaining non-committal helps one's survival.
This trend was also evident in women's initial responses to SL in Pomatambo, peaking at apathy,
whereas the men peaked at moderately strong initial support (Webb 1996). Chart 2 summarizes
this.
The results for the levels of identification showed similar results. The men were much
more committal in revealing how they identified themselves: in Pomatambo, Vilcashuaman, and
as Quechua speakers. The women fluctuated much more and peaked at Pomatambo, Quechuaspeaking, and especially the non-committal "depends" or "all equal." These women also tended
to be older, with less formal education, and less contact with the outside, rendering them less
able to articulate the practical differences between the different levels of identification. Chart 3
summarizes these results.

106

Male vs. Female political authority trust levels
8

7
6

Frequency of
responses
(#)

5
4

111 Male
□ Female

Female

0
Political level

Sex
1

2

-2 (Pomatambo), -l(Vilcashuaman), 0 (neutral, apathetic, or equal), 1 (Ayacucho), 2 (Lima)
15

Chart 2

Male vs. Female identification levels
7
6

5

Frequency of
responses(#)

4
3

2

0
0

2

4

Identification

5

Q)

6

O (Pomatambino), 1 (vilquino), 2 (ayacuchano), 3 (quechua-speaking),
4 (peruano), 5 (latino americano), 6 (all equal, depends on context)

Q) <ii
<ii E
:a, if

Chart 3

15

Note: Frequencies for all graphs based on informants' lists, and does not represent the number of people who

expressed each marker. For example, a person may put one, two, or none of the markers.

107

Education, political trust and identification levels
The results for the effects of education level on political trust and identification levels
were not surprising. Generally, the more formally educated tended to trust Vilcashuaman level
more than the Pomatambo level, whereas the less formally educated tended to trust Pomatambo
political authority the most. This trend is probably due to the movement of people outside to
either Pujas or Vilcashuaman to attend secondary school. These people needed to negotiate with
the state apparatus (schools) in those places. Therefore, they have much more familiarity with
the political workings of communities in Vilcashuaman outside of Pomatambo, which in turn
leads to an increased sense of trust at the provincial level. Chart 4 summarizes these results.
The effects of education level on identification were similar. There was a wider range of
identities that the more educated chose. Both the more and less educated peaked at Pomatambo,
however the more educated also peaked at Quechua-speaking while the less educated did not.
One may hypothesize that the reason why those with less education identified more consistently
with Pomatambo and not the others is that they generally also spend less time outside. However,
this was found to be untrue. Chart 6 shows that people who have spent more time outside of
Pomatambo actually identify with Pomatambo the strongest. So what are alternative
hypotheses?
One hypothesis is that with increased formal education, and therefore more exposure to
national history and a sense of distinctiveness of the highlands as opposed to elsewhere, one has
a wider sense of identity. The informants still identified very strongly with Pomatambo, but
were also more likely to cite other identities, especially Quechua-speaking because it is a
contrast to the national Spanish-speaking world. The abstract world, the knowledge of people,
events, ideologies beyond one's personal direct experience, is heightened by more formal

108

education. In the Pomatambo primary school, children are taught Spanish as a second language
in the later years, opening up a new world, a Spanish-speaking one, to them. They are also
taught traditional customs and about the Incas and the founding heroes of Latin America,
especially Simon Bolivar and Jose de San Martin. This gives them a wider set of identifications
to choose from. Indeed, the only people who mentioned the Incas as their ancestors were the
younger educated people. Even the more educated older cohort did not mention the Incas as
their ancestors. Rather, they mentioned grand or great grand parents. What we are seeing might
be hints of a national folk ideology created by the educational curriculum. The creation of a
national folk ideology is generally part of a larger mestizaje program trying to turn autonomous
groups into a larger national identity (Mallon 1992). Under Velasco, such a program of mestizaje
failed, but some of the elements have been revived: "One of the most popular posters of the
agrarian reform made clear that the overall state project meant to idealise the Indian past, while
incorporating and educating contemporary Indians (Mallon 1992: 48)."

More vs. Less Educated political authority trust levels. Based on
me · n ears of education.
7

6
5
Ill Less Educated

Frequency of 4
responses ( #} 3

□ More

Educated

2

More Educated

0

-2

Sex
0
Political level

1

2

-2 (Pomatambo), -l(Vilcashuaman), 0 (neutral, apathetic, or equal), 1 (Ayacucho), 2

Chart 4

109

More vs. Less Educated identification levels. Based on median years of
education.
5
4

Frequency of
responses(#)

3

Less Educated

2

More educated

Identification

5

6

O (Pomatambino), 1 (vilquino), 2 (ayacuchano), 3 (quechua-speaking),
4 (peruano), 5 (latino americano), 6 (all equal, depends on context)

Chart 5

Time spent outside of Pomatambo, Political trust and identification levels
The most surprising results came from an analysis of the relationship between time spent
outside of Pomatambo and political trust and identification levels. One would expect that people
who spent more time outside of Pomatambo would identify with it less or identify with other
levels more. However, the opposite was true. In both political authority trust and identification,
the people who spent more time outside of Pomatambo had stronger, narrower sympathies with
Pomatambo. The people who spent less time outside Pomatambo also showed moderately strong
sympathies for the more local levels, but also were much more non-committal, peaking at
"depends" or "all equal" for identification. In terms of political authority trust, the people who
spent less time outside of Pomatambo peaked at Vilcashuaman and neutral or apathetic. What
does this mean? I propose that what we are seeing is the relationship between identity-formation
and increased contact with worlds that are different from Pomatambo, heightening a sense of

110

distinctiveness. Those that spent less time outside of Pomatambo, less than five years, are less
aware of a sense of opposition and contrast that result from practical experience of the "other."
A sense of identity is strengthened by the experience of difference. The time spent outside also
served to decrease non-committal self-identifications. Charts 6 and 7 summarize these results.
More vs. Less time spent outside Pomatambo and political authority
trust levels. Based on median years spent outside (5).
6

5
4

r::~~une:_.:vc :fl 3

re time

2

Identification

-2 (Pomatambo), -l(Vilcashuaman), 0 (neutral, apathetic, or equal), 1 (Ayacucho), 2 (Lima)

Chart 6
More vs. Less time spent outside Pomatambo and identification levels.
Based on median years spent outside (5).

7
6

5

Frequency of 4
responses(#) 3

re time

4

Identification

5

6

a (Pomatambino), 1 (vilquino), 2 (ayacuchano), 3 (quechua-speaking),
4 (peruano), 5 (latino americano), 6 (all equal, depends on context)

Chart7

111

Views on out-migration and the young
Generally, Pomatambans view the out-migration of the young as economically necessary
but nevertheless undesired. With the better roads, vehicle traffic comes to Pomatambo daily.
Generally, the young send money back to the family members that remained in Pomatambo.
They sometimes also contribute financially to community building projects. Because the jobs
they have in the cities, Ayacucho and Lima, are menial work, they are not able to visit the
community regularly, maybe only once or twice a year. According to some informants, they still
remember Pomatambo and come back occasionally for the fiestas. They also start Pomatambo
clubs and organizations in their urban neighborhoods. In some ways, a new vertical
complementarity has been created by the out-migration. Money and gifts are sent from long
distances. The new vertical complementarity is different from the traditional vertical
complementarity is that it is based on a cash economy, not agriculture. Also, the people who go
elsewhere do not return seasonally. Their concrete roots are in the cities where they started
families. According to a man who has lived in Lima for many years, whom I met during the
Pomatambo festival, about twenty-percent of the people who migrate out remember Pomatambo
while the rest try to distance themselves from it.
Despite the economic advantages of having children work in the cities, there does seem
to be a general consensus that the time spent away from the community diminishes their
community spirit and respect for community elders and customs. One of the elders of the
community expressed that even the young people who live in the village and wield power do not
respect the elders nowadays. According to him, they do not consult the elders. Another example
of this apparent slackening of respect for Pomatambo customs among the young took place

112

during the fiesta patronal of Pomatambo in late August. During the fiesta, there was a soccer
tournament between the local communities on the plaza of Pomatambo. During the soccer
match, the villagers danced all around Pomatambo and arrived at the plaza. Instead of stopping
the match momentarily to show respect, the players played on and even into the crowd of
dancing villagers. It was not until after some chastisement that they paused the match
momentarily.

Conclusion
Social bonds between community members were weakened as a direct result of the
violence and ensuing out-migration. The evolution of state strategies of control during the
violence depended very much on who was in power. Fujimori finally ended the violence through
increasing state capacity, thus making rural Peru more "legible" or accessible to the state
apparatus. SL violence in the area forced the state to pay attention and develop strategies to
prevent such movements in the future.
However, the developmentalist policies pursued by Fujimori further eroded the
importance of the community to its members. The ideology espoused by the first vision, the
vision in line with Fujimori's, is very similar to the numerous ideologies espoused by statebuilding regimes throughout history. Those regimes focused on brealcing bonds between peasants
th

to make them more manageable by the state. For example, in 19 century Russia, Count Sergei
Witte and Petr Stolypin pursued the same agenda:
" ... Third tableau: departing peasants, freed from restraints of strips, set up khutor
[integral farmsteads with dwellings] on new fields and adapt latest methods. Those who
remain, freed of village and family restraints, plunge into a demand economy-all are
richer, more productive, the cities get fed, and the peasants are not proletarianized (Scott
1998: 43)."

113

The emphasis on "scientific agriculture" bringing about peasant prosperity was as much about
decreasing peasant autonomy and the prevailing dogma about scientific agriculture as it was
based on hard evidence (Scott 1998: 43). This prejudicial attitude toward peasants is very
evident in the opinions of Otto Castro Mendoza.
However, due to the electoral character of the political system and sympathetic NGOs,
communities like Pomatambo do have a say in policies that benefit the community. For
example, they are active in trying to establish a secondary school in Pomatambo so that the
young do not need to go to Pujas or Vilcashuaman, strengthening solidarity, preventing the social
problems that accompany living alone away from parents, and helping the local labor-based
economy. They are also very active in asking for aid from the local and departmental
government. Furthermore, they applaud the works of people like Maria Gutierrez, and are very
receptive to initiatives that celebrate, revive, and respect the local customs and traditions. The
interplay between the communities and local traditionally minded politicians show that the state
is quite necessary for the survival of these peasant communities. However, it is a double-edged
sword, as the state could also be an agent for the erosion of the same communities, depending on
who is in power.
As of now, the cards seem to be stacked against Pomatambo and communities like it due
to the inexorable pull of the national and global economy. As long as the young keep migrating
out, the future of these communities looks dim. The first vision predominates in the national
arena, but its interaction with the second vision, which emphasizes traditional culture, sets in
motion a process of national identity formation. With increased exposure to and experience of
the state apparatus, combined with an educational curriculum that teaches a folk culture,
Pomatambans have a wider sense of identity while at the same time wealcer links between each

114

other. The use of cash and reliance on state-produced goods, and indeed, the desire for stateproduced goods, weakens the local economic and social structure. What we see might be the
first steps in the national unifying process ofmestizaje. If this were indeed the case, we would
expect local identities to diminish and a national folk identity to emerge over the next few
decades.
While the survey results are not statistically compelling due to the low numbers, the
general impressions from the combination of interviews, participant observation, and surveys are
what are important. They reveal that the community bonds based on economy and politics are
weakening, while a general sense of identification is growing with more outside contact. Of
course, these are based on Pomatamban responses. The results might look very different for
Poamtambo expatriates who do not return at all. Nevertheless, both examples of the expatriates
and the Pomatambans show one undeniable trend: the increased reliance on the state apparatus.

115

Chapter 5
CONCLUSION
In my thesis thus far, we have explored the ways that the Inca state changed the way
Pomatambo-Vilcashuaman society was held together for state purposes of control. We have seen
how the Incas depopulated the rebellious region to remake the sacred geography, social
geography, and the political structures. They moved people from many different ethnic groups
to repopulate the area as the Incas wished. In addition to creating a buffer zone of safety, these
policies created an artificial society dependent on the Inca state, as the different ethnic groups did
not traditionally have ties to each other. The Vilcashuaman area became a highly integrated
island in a sea of relatively "illegible" conquered societies. The Incas used Vilcashuaman as the
springboard to make the surrounding areas more "legible" to the state, but did not complete it
before the Spaniards conquered the Incas. Likewise, the modern Peruvian state reacted to the
Shining Path insurgency by implementing policies that made the Vilcashuaman region more
"legible" and thus easier to control.
In many ways, the state legibility projects of the Inca and the modern Peruvian state were
similar. Both involved military actions followed by society reorganization policies. However,
the two projects were also fundamentally different. The biggest difference was that the Incas
divided the people they conquered by maintaining distinctions between the ethnic groups,
sometimes even creating them (D' Altroy 1992). On the other hand, the modern Peruvian state
stresses policies that homogenize the diverse communities, creating a national identity. Why this
fundamental difference? I want to argue that this fundamental difference is due to three main

116

factors: the history of state presence in the Vilcashuaman area before the rebellions, technology
limiting or furthering state capacity, and the economic base of the state.

Similarities
Although there are fundamental differences between state strategies of control for the two
different states, we must not overlook their similarities, which could tell us much about the
general nature of state control. First of all, it is striking that both states emphasized movement of
people and the control of that movement. For the Incas, they depopulated the PomatarnboVilcashuaman area and transplanted new ethnic groups in. They built control towers and gates
outside of population centers and at bridges to control movement. The modern economy of Peru
is creating an exodus of the young from Pomatambo into urban areas. The placement of paved
roads also controls movement. The best roads are roads leading to centers: Vilcashuarnan,
Ayacucho, Lima, with Lima being at the top of the hierarchy. The roads between non-centers
are in very bad condition. For example, it is faster to travel from Ayacucho to Cuzco by going
down to the coast and then circling around rather than take the much more direct and unpaved
route through the mountains. This focuses the economy on the coast because there is less noncenter to non-center traffic.
Another similarity is that both the Inca state and the modern Peruvian state concentrated
on breaking the territorial base of their enemies. The Incas did so by taking the fortresses and
moving out the hostile populace. The Peruvian state did so by establishing military bases in the
urban zones of Vilcashuaman and establishing the rondas, severely limiting the movement and
the spread of SL in the area.
Finally, the two were similar in that their strategies involved the breaking of
bonds between people and rearranging the disassociated units in new ways. The Incas

117

transplanted new ethnic groups and made them dependent on the state, whereas the modern
Peruvian state through economic policies are breaking bonds between community members and
making the disassociated members more economically dependent on the state rather than the
community in addition to possibly creating an Andean national identity.

Differences

The modern Peruvian state was already the official political authority in the area for
nearly two centuries before the Shining Path insurgency, whereas the Incas were not the official
political authority before the conquest of the area. The Peruvian state already had a functioning
political system, albeit somewhat irrelevant to the peasant communities, whereas the Incas were
total foreigners. This means that the first steps of integration such as building roads, schools,
and infrastructure were already implemented in the area before the Shining Path came on the
scene. According to Mallon, the creation of a unifying national identity in Latin American
countries involved several steps: the breaking of ethnic autonomy, the creation of a national
folkloric identity, and lastly, a national identity without the folklore or with a diluted sense ofit
(Mallon 1992: 50). The Peruvian state inherited a social landscape that already had very weak
ethnic autonomy, whereas the Incas did not. Therefore, the difference could possibly be
attributed to which stage of the national identity-making process the two different states were at.
Ethnic identities had pretty much faded away in the Vilcashuaman area before Peru's
independence (Silverblatt 1995). Differences between Vilcashuarnan rural communities in the
modern era do not rest on ethnic identities. The Incas were confronted with a very different
social landscape, one populated by fiercely independent ethnic groups. Because the Incas lacked
the state capacity (due to limitations in technology and the brief period of time they were in the
area before the Spanish conquest) to totally destroy ethnic identities, they employed the old

118

"divide and conquer" strategy and played on inter-ethnic mistrust. They unified the local
populace by creating a mosaic subject population dependent on the Inca state for economic,
religious, and political functions. Whereas the Incas increased their political power by trying to
prevent the populace from uniting and rebelling, the modem Peruvian state is doing so by
breaking down the necessity ofrural communities for their members. Rural communities, with
their autonomy, are seen by the most powerful actors of the state as potential challengers to state
control (Scott 1998). This difference in strategy can be attributed to the size of politically
autonomous units in Vilcashuaman society at certain times. In the Inca period, they were
chiefdoms or ethnic groups. In the modern period, they are rural communities. The policies of
control, then, would be directed at these units. The Incas wanted to break up ethnic alliances by
transplanting ethnic groups to different areas and creating mistrust between them. The modem
Peruvian state implements policies that erode the necessity of the rural communities to their
members, especially the young.
Furthermore, the modern Peruvian state created a hierarchy of political authority, with
traditional village authorities as much lower than state officials. It was only due to the work of
traditionally minded politicians like Maria Gutierrez that the village authorities survived at all.
Society in the Inca era allowed for overlapping spheres of political and economic authority.
However, with the modern nation-state, the state is the only source oflegitimate control or force.
To achieve this aim of being the sole source oflegitimate force, states in Europe in the late 18 th
and 19th centuries broke bonds between people in villages by undercutting the economic
necessity of a vibrant rural civil society. The Industrial Revolution necessitated people moving
from the villages to the cities and work in factories, making them disassociated and "free" for the
state to mold them into a "nation (Gellner 1983)." Likewise, in Vilcashuaman, the combination

119

of undercutting the necessity of the rural community to its members and economic forces that
encourage people to move to the cities has favored the first vision of control.
Another reason for the fundamental difference is the availability of certain technology.
While the Incas carried out the same legibility projects as the modem state----censuses, taxation,
concentration of population, map-making, public media, language standardization, statistics, and
internal security apparatuses-the degree and frequency to which they carried these out was
limited by the technology available. The modern Peruvian state, with all the benefits ofpostIndustrial Revolution technology, had greater capacity to carry out these legibility projects.
They have much greater capacity to affect large numbers of people within a very short time with
technology such as vehicles, televisions, identification cards, paved roads, helicopters,
telephones, etc. This means that they are much more able to create a unified identity based on
the lowest denominator in society: the individual. The state, now more than ever, could
penetrate deeply into the lives of individuals through advances in technology. The Incas had to
work with the higher denominators in society-ayllus and ethnic groups-in their strategies of
control because they did not have the state capacity to intrude so deeply and so often into the
lives of individuals.
Furthermore, technology also changed the rules of war. Fortifications on top of
mountains were no longer effective because of helicopters and the sophisticated supply lines of
the modem Peruvian state ensured a permanently supplied army. The safer areas became
mountain slopes of the river valleys because vehicle and air traffic had a harder time getting to
those places. It also means that insurgents would have a hard time establishing territorial bases
in the integrated zones, facilitating the spread of violence as in the case of SL.

120

Another implication of the advances in technology is that the actors with ample financial
resources control what is shown on T.V. During Fujimori's tenure, the media was controlled by
the national intelligence service (SNI) (Mauceri 1995: 24). When one turns on Peruvian
television, very few if any T.V. personalities have Andean features. They all look white or light
mestizo. When someone with Andean features does show up, it is often in a comedy ridiculing
the "stupid cholo." The values transmitted by the media are also very different from traditional
peasant values, further eroding the moral base of the countryside. The consumerist ideology
transmitted by mass media, especially television, is aimed at the disconnected individual and not
at politically autonomous communities. The bias of the media against rural indigenous
appearance, values, culture, and way of life greatly favors the first vision.
Because the rural villages ofVilcashuarnan lack funds to make their own television
programs, they must rely on the national and international programming. A couple of years ago,
Pomatambo wanted to do a T.V. program on the Inca road. However, they had to rent a camera,
which ran out of battery once it got to Pomatambo effectively ending the venture. Without state
support and block grants, rural civil society ventures such as this would not succeed. A lack of
dynamism due to financial restrictions also makes rural communities less appealing to the young
who overwhelmingly desire to follow the "bright lights" of the city.
Advances in technology also fuel the volatility of the domestic market because
international market economy has much leverage due to fast and easy transport of goods and
capital. While this may bring overall prosperity to Peru, the economic system marginalizes the
economic importance of rural communities, which brings us to the last reason.
Lastly, the difference may also be attributed to the economic base of the two states. For
the Incas, it was primarily herding and agriculture. It would not be economically advantageous

121

to destroy the political and economic structure of the rural community because they are needed
to produce the much needed food and wool to sustain the state. With the modern Peruvian state,
the economy shifted from agriculture to export of raw materials and foreign trade. This policy
marginalizes the agricultural and herder communities of the mountains (Dollfus 1986: 22).
Ironically, it was such a policy that led to the Shining Path insurgency, as the state generally
ignored the Vilcashuaman area because it was not essential to the national economy. To the
prevailing view in the state, rural communities may not be necessary for the economic prosperity
of the country, but they are still welters of political autonomy that could fall prey to ideologies of
groups like that of SL. While there are some actors in the state who wish to preserve rural
communities, the majority, as evidenced in national policy, sees them as unnecessary, backward,
and even potentially dangerous.

Implications

Both the Incas and the modern Peruvian state tried to remake local society and economy
in the Pomatambo-Vilcashuaman area. They each try to weaken what they perceived as most
dangerous to the state: for the Incas it was ethnic alliances, for the modern Peruvian state it was
local, non-state autonomy. For the modern Peruvian state, this policy is somewhat ironic. After
all, the SL brought a foreign ideology in, and was resisted by the rural elites, especially the
traditional authorities. The SL tried to decapitate the political structures in the communities so
that they could fill the vacuum. In areas like Puno and the Mantaro valley, where rural civil
society was very strong, the SL had very little success in winning rural support (Kent 1993: 446).
A major reason for the decline of the SL was the state sponsoring rural patrol
committees: the rondas. In fact, the SL was greatly helped by the state's initial unwillingness to
combat SL influence in the Pomatambo-Vilcashuaman area. There was an insufficient number

122

of police (there are still only 7 policemen for all of Vilcashuaman province), and systematic
abandonment of posts by the police only helped the SL. It seems quite convincing that rural civil
society is not a threat to the state. In fact, as the second vision stresses, it can be an anchor
against pernicious state-toppling ideologies like that of SL. Nevertheless, as Scott emphasized,
many state policies are not so much about efficiency, or in the case of my thesis, about effective
strategies of control, as about prevailing dogmas about "progress" and disdain for the peasant
ways of life and autonomy
What does this mean for the future of Peru's peasantry? Will it either disappear
or change greatly, like the first vision hopes, or will it revive under its own values, as the second
vision hopes? With current trends, the first vision will most likely win. However, if the rural
communities realize that their survival is at stake and actively engage with the democratic
system, there might be hope for a future countryside with traditional rural values: do not lie, do
not steal, work hard. If Steve Stern is correct in his assertion that rural communities are masters
of survival, there may be hope after all for rural communities such as Pomatambo. Nevertheless,
they face a formidable challenge, as the advances in technology has allowed whoever controls
the state agenda to intrude deeply into people's lives and reorganize society with great
efficiency. The two visions represent different agendas even though they have the same purpose
of keeping peace and bringing prosperity to the countryside. The Peruvian state apparatus has
never had more state capacity to carry out any vision. Whichever vision wins, one can be sure
that peasant society in Vilcashuaman will not be the same. The nature of peasant society in
Vilcashuaman, however, would be vastly different depending on which vision wins.

123

Bibliography
Alcedo, Antonio de. "Diccionario Geografico de las Indias Occidentales o America." Torno IV.
Madrid: Real Academia Espanola, 1967. Vol. 208 of Biblioteca de Autores Espanoles.
Ciriaco Perez Bustamante.
Alvarez Quispe. Jorge L., Garcia Gomez. Gilmer, and Palomino Vallejo. Efrain V., eds. Plan
Estrategico de Desarrollo de Vilcashuaman al 2012. Vilcashuaman,2003.
BBC. "Mass sterilisation scandal shocks Peru."
<http://news.bbc.co. uk/2/hi/americas/2148793 .strn>: 07/24/2002.
Babb, Florence. "Women and Men in Vicos, Peru: A Case of Unequal Development." Peruvian
Contexts of Change. Stein, William. New Brunswick: Transaction Books; U2, 1985. 163210.
Baldeon Malpartida, Severo, Teofilo Allende Ccahuana, and Vivanco Pomacanchari. Proyecto
Qhapag Nan: Proyecto Piloto Vilcashuaman. Analisis Territorial de Vilcashuaman
(Volumen II). Lima: Instituto Nacional de Cultura, 2004.
Burger, Richard L., and Michael D. Glascock. "Locating the Quispisisa Obsidian Source in the
Department of Ayacucho, Peru." Latin American Antiquity. 11.3 (September 2000). 258268.
Carabajal, Pedro de. "Descripcion Fecha de la Provincia de Vilcas Guaman Por el Illustre Senor
Don Pedro de Carabajal, Corregidor y Justicia Mayor Della, Ante Xpristobal de Gamboa,
Escribano de su Juzgado, en el Ano de 1586." Relaciones Geograficas de Indias. Marcos
Jimenez de la Espada. Jose Urbano Martinez Carreras. Biblioteca de Autores Espanoles,
Torno 183. Madrid: Real Academia Espanola; U2, 1965. 205-219.
Castillo Vilchez, Oscar F. "Cambios Economicos-Sociales en la Comunidad Campesina de
Pomatambo-Vilcashuaman." Pre-Profesional diss., Universidad Nacional de San
Cristobal de Huamanga. 1998.
Chahud Gutierrez, Carlos. Investigacion Argueologica en Vilcashuaman. Ayacucho: Universidad
Nacional de San Cristobal de Huamanga, 1966.
Cieza de Leon, Pedro. The Incas. Victor Von Hagen. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press,
1959.
Cobo, Bernabe. History of the Inca Empire an Account of the Indians' Customs and Their Origin,
Together with a Treatise on Inca Legends, History, and Social Institutions. Texas:
University of Texas Press, 1979.

Comision de la Verdad y Reconciliacion. Informe. "Torno IV: Primera Parle: El Proceso, Los
Hechos, Las Vfctimas: La Region Sur Central." Informe de la Comision de la Verdad y
Reconciliacion. Spanish.
<Http://www.derechos.org/nizkor/peru/libros/cv/iv/12.pdf>,2003.
Dalton, George. "Editor's Preface." Economic Organization of the Inka State. John V. Murra.
Connecticut: JAI Press Inc; U2, 1980.
D'Altroy, Terence N. Provincial power in the Inka empire. Washington, D.C: Smithsonian
Institution Press, 1992.
Dillehay, Tom D. "Tawantinsuyu Integration of the Chillon Valley, Peru: A Case of Inca GeoPolitical Mastery" Journal of Field Archaeology. 4.2. (Winter, 1977), 397-405.
Dollfus, Olivier. "The tropical Andes: a changing mosaic." Anthropological History of the
Andean Polities. Ed. John V. Murra. Cambridge: University of Cambridge Press,
1986.10-22.
D'Altroy, Terence N. The Incas. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2002.
Earle, Timothy K. "Chiefdoms in Archaeological and Ethnohistorical Perspective." Annual
Review of Anthropology. 16 (1987). 279-308.
Emery, Alex. "Peru President Approval Rises to 6-Month High, El Comercio Says."
<http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=l0000086&sid=aqd4c23.aG3s&refer=latin
_america>: Bloomberg, May 15, 2005.
Espinosa Reyes, Ricardo. La Gran Ruta Inca: El Capag Nan. Lima: Petroleos de! Peru, 2002.
Felipe Paz Soldan, Mariano. Diccionario Geografico Estadistico de Peru. Lima: Imprenta de!
Estado, 1877.
Gamarra Guillen, Carmen. "Estudio de la Realidad Socio-Economica de la Provincia de
Vilcashuaman.," Universidad Nacional de San Cristobal de Huamanga. 1998.
Gellner, Ernest. Nations and Nationalism. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1983.
Guaman Poma de Ayala, Felipe. Nueva Coronica y Buen Gobierno. Ayacucho: Biblioteca
Ayacucho, 1980.
Gonzalez, Jose. "Guerrillas and Coca in the Upper Huallaga Valley." The Shining Path of Peru.
David Scott Palmer. Second Edition. New York: St. Martin's Press; U2, 1994. 123-143.
Gonzalez Carre, Enrique, Jorge Cosmopolis A., and Jorge Levano P. La Ciudad Inca de
Vilcashuaman. Ayacucho: Universidad Nacional de San Cristobal de Huamanga, 1981.

Gonzalez Carre, Enrique, Denise Pozzi-Escot, Muriel Pozzi-Escot, and Cirilo Vivanco
Pomacanchari. Los chankas: cultura material. Ayacucho,1987.
Gonzalez Carre, Enrique, Denise Pozzi-Escot, and Cirilo Vivanco Pomacanchari. El area
historica chanka. Ayacucho: Universidad Nacional de San Cristobal de Huamanga, 1988.
Gonzalez Carre, Enrique. Los Sefiorios Chankas. Lima: Universidad Nacional de San Cristobal
de Huamanga, Instituto Andino de Estudios Arqueologicos, 1992.
Gorriti, Gustavo. "The Quota." The Peru Reader. Starn, Orin; Carlos Ivan Degregori; Robin
Kirk. Second Edition. Durham and London: Duke University Press; U2, 2005. 331-342.
Gutierrez, Maria. Interview. Vilcashuaman, August 2006.
Huertas, Lorenzo. "Estudio Preliminar." Las Tribus de Ancku Wallokc. Second edition. Lima:
Impreso en el Peru; U2, 1983. I-XXVI.
Hyslop, Jolm. The Inka Road System. Orlando: Academic Press, 1984.
Instituto Nacional de Estadistica e Informatica. Estadisticas de Centros Poblados 1993.
Pomatambo-Vilcashuaman. Spanish.
http://www.inei.gob.pe/BancoCuadros/bancua09.asp?PARAMETR0=14051101&ndep=
A YACUCHO&npro=VILCAS - HUAMAN&ndis=VILCAS - HUAMAN: INEI, 24 Mar
2006.
Instituto Nacional de Estadistica e Informatica (INEI). X Censo de Poblacion y V de Vivienda
2005 (CPV). http://www.inei.gob.pe: 2005
Ivan Degregori, Carlos. "The Origins and Logic of Shining Path: Two Views." The Shining Path
of Peru. David Scott Palmer. Second edition. New York: St. Martin's Press.; U2, 2004.
51-62.
Jimenez de la Espada, Marcos. Relaciones Geograficas de Indias. Marcos Jimenez de la Espada.
Jose Urbano Martinez Carreras. Biblioteca de Autores Espaoles, Torno 183. Madrid: Real
Academia Espanola; U2, 1965.
Kent, Robert B. "Geographical Dimensions of the Shining Path Insurgency m Peru."
Geographical Review. 83.4., October 1993. 441-454.
Kolata, Alan. The Tiwanaku: Portrait of an Andean Civilization. Cambridge: Blackwell, 1993.
Landa Vasquez, Ladislao, and Juan Alberto Lopez Alarcon. Proyecto Ohapag Nan, Plan Piloto
de Vilcashuaman, Informe Etnografico 2004. Lima: Instituto Nacional de Cultura, 2005.
Lorandi, Ana Maria. " 'Horizons' in Andean archaeology." Anthropological History of
the Andean Polities. Ed. Jolm V. Murra. Cambridge: University of Cambridge Press,
1986.35-45.

Mallon, Florencia E. "Indian Connnunities, Political Cultures, and the State in Latin America,
1780-1990." Journal of Latin American Studies 24 (1992): 35-53.
Mauceri, Philip. "Military Politics and Counter-Insurgency in Peru." Journal of Interamerican
Studies and World Affairs. 33.4 (Winter 1991). 83-109.
Mendoza Castro, Otto. Interview. Vilcashuaman, August 2006.
Montoya, Rodrigo. "Ayacucho: Una introduccion necesaria." Peru: El problema agrario en
debate. Eguren, Fernando; Hopkins, Raul; Kervyn, Bruno; Montoya, Rodrigo. Lima:
Universidad Nacional de San Cristobal de Huamanga; U2, 1988. 421-428.
Monzon, Luis de, Beltran Saravia, Pedro de Frias, and Pedro. Taypimarca. "Descripcion de la
Tierra Del Repartimiento de Atunsora, Encomendado en Hernando Palomino, Jurisdicion
de la Ciudad de Huamanga. Ano de 1586." Relaciones Geograficas de Indias. Marcos
Jimenez de la Espada. Jose Urbano Martinez Carreras. Biblioteca de Autores Espaiioles,
Torno 183. Madrid: Real Academia Espanola; U2, 1965. 220-225.
Monzo [Monzon], Luis, Pedro Gonzalez, and Jhuan de. Arbe. "Descripcion de la Tierra Del
Repartimiento de Atunrucana y Laramati, Encomendado en Don Pedro de
CordovaJurisdicion de la Ciudad de Huamanga. Ano de 1586." Relaciones Geograficas
de Indias. Marcos Jimenez de la Espada. Jose Urbano Martinez Carreras. Biblioteca de
Autores Espanoles, Torno 183. Madrid: Real Academia Espanola; U2, 1965. 226-236.
Murra, John. "El 'control vertical' de un maximo de pisos ecologicos en la economia de las
sociedades andinas." Visita de la Provincia de Leon de Huanuco en 1562. Huanuco:
Universidad Nacional Hermilio Valdizan, 1972. p. 427-476.
Murra, John V. "The expansion of the Inka state: armies, war, and rebellions." Anthropological
History of the Andean Polities. Ed. John V. Murra. Cambridge: University of Cambridge
Press, 1986. p.49-56.
Navarro Del Aguila, Victor. Las Tribus de Ancku Wallokc. 1939. Ediciones Atusparia. Cuzco;
Impre so en el Peru, 1983.
Najarro Quispe, Quintin. Historia de Pomatambo. Unpublished manuscript, 2006.
Nugent, David. "Building the State, Making the Nation: The Bases and Limits of State
Centralization in "Modern" Peru." American Anthropologist. 96.2 (June 1994). 333-369.
Pachacuti-Yamqui Salcamayhua, Juan de Santa Cruz. "An Account of the Antiquities of Peru."
Markham, Clements. The Rites and Laws of the Yncas. Clements Markham. London; U2,
1873. 67-122.

Palmer, David Scott. "Rebellion in Rural Peru: The Origins and Evolution of Sendero
Luminoso." Comparative Politics 18.2 (January 1986): 127-146.
Palmer, David Scott. "Introduction: History, Politics, and Shining Path in Peru." The Shining
Path of Peru. Palmer, David Scott. New York: St. Martin's Press; U2, 1994. 1-32.
Perez Liu, Rosario. "Violencia, migraci6n, productividad: cuatro estudios de caso en las
comunidades ayacuchanas." Peru: El problema agrario en debate. Eguren, Fernando;
Hopkins, Raul; Kervyn, Bruno; Montoya, Rodrigo. Lima: Nacional de San Cristobal de
Huarnanga; U2, 1988. 515-536.
PRONAMACHS, "Impacto Social MIMA Pomatambo." Vilcashuaman,Unpublished manuscript.
Rousseau, David. Personal communication. Psci 252: Evolution of the International System,
Spring 2005.
Salomon, Frank. "Vertical politics on the Inka frontier." Anthropological History of the Andean
Polities. Ed. John V. Murra. Cambridge: University of Cambridge Press, 1986.89-115.
Sarmiento de Gamboa, Pedro. History of the
Nendeln/Lietchenstein: Halduyt Society, 1967.

Incas.

Kraus

Reprint

Limited.

Schreiber, Katharina J. "Conquest and Consolidation: A Comparison of the Wari and Inka
Occupations of a Highland Peruvian Valley." American Antiquity 52.2 (1987): 266-284.
Schreiber, Katharina J. "The Inca Occupation of the Province of Andamarca Lucanas, Peru."
Provincial Inca: Archaeological and Ethnohistorical Assessment of the Impact of the Inca
State. Malpass, Michael A. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press; 1993. 77-116.
Scott, James. Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have
Failed. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1998.
Silverblatt, Irene. "Becoming Indian in the Central Andes of Seventeenth-Century Peru." After
Colonialism: Imperial Histories and Postcolonial Displacements. Gyan Prakash.
Princeton: Princeton University Press; 1995. 279-298.
Stanish, Charles. "Nonmarket Imperialism in the Prehispanic Americas of the Titicaca Basin."
American Antiquity. 8.3 (September 1997). 195-216.
Starn, Orin. "To Revolt against the Revolution: War and Resistance in Peru's Andes." Cultural
Anthropology. 10.4., November 1995. 547-580.
Stern, Steve J. Peru's Indian Peoples and the Challenge of Spanish Conquest: Huarnanga to 1640.
Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1982.
Stiglich, German. Diccionario Geografico Del Peru. Lima: Imprenta Torres Aguirre, 1922.

Sun Tzu. Trans. Lionel Giles. On the Art of War: The oldest military treatise in the world.
London: Keagan Paul, 2002.
Taipe Campos, Nestor Godofredo. "El agua como operador simb6lico: La laguna de
Choclococha y la funci6n civilizadora de los dioses puma, halc6n y perro." Agua, Revista
de CulturaAndina. 1.1. Huancayo,2003. 185-198.
Urton, Gary. Inca Myths. Austin: University of Texas Press; U2, 1999.
Valdez, Lidio M., and Cirilo Vivanco. "Arqueologia de la Cuenca de! Qaracha, Ayacucho, Peru."
Latin American Antiquity. 5.2., June 1994. 144-157.
Vega, Garcilaso de la. Royal Commentaries of the Incas, and General History of Peru. Texas:
University of Texas Press, 1989.
Von Hagen, Victor Von. Highway of the Sun. New York: Duell, Sloan & Pearce, 1955.
Weber, Max. The Theory of Social and Economic Organization. Trans. A.M. Henderson, Talcott
Parsons. New York: Free Press, 1964.
Webb, Adam. Community, Peasants, and the Shining Path Guerrillas: A Field Study m
Ayacucho, Peru. Unpublished thesis. Cambridge, 1996.
Weiner, Charles. Peru y Bolivia, Relato de Viaje. Lima: Instituto Frances de Estudios Andinos,
1993.
Wust, Walter, and German Coronado. Atlas Departamental Del Peru: Ayacucho, lea. Walter
Wust; German Coronado. 8 vols. Lima: PEISA, 2003.
Yaranga Valderrama, Abdon. "Las 'reducciones', uno de los instrumentos de! etnocidio." Revista
Complutense de Historia de America. 21., 1995. 241-262.
Zuidema, Reiner T. "Algunos problemas etnohist6ricos de! Departamento de Ayacucho."
Wamani. I., 1966. 68-75.

Appendix 1: Photos

Photo 1: Pomatambo at the trees and to the left of the great flat hill in the
backgronnd. Siqi Rumi in the foreground.

Photo 2: Hitching post below the possible ruins of an Inca tambo. Note the hole and
the grooves above the hole. The hole goes through the stone. Handheld GPS for
scale.

Photo 3: Arteza Rumi. Partly carved, partly natural. Inca road above where the
row of horses is. Horses in the foreground show scale.

Photo 4: Fields near Pomatambo. Road at bottom is Puccas Route 2. It was an Inca
road paved over in the 1970s.

Appendix 2: Survey questions
Edad
Sexo
Afios de educaci6n
Tipo de trabajo ~
Numero de hijos

Numero de entrevista
( <3

➔

6Puede usted leer y escribir?)

6Ha vivido usted fuera de Pomatambo? 6Cuanto tiempo y d6nde?

6Lee algunos libros o peri6dicos a menudo? 6Que tipo de libros y/o que peri6dicos?

1) 6Cuantas veces al mes viaja usted fuera de Pomatambo? lAd6nde y para que?
2) Cuando usted habla con las autoridades o los empleados del gobiemo en Vilcashuaman, 6que idioma habla o que idioma prefiere hablar?

3) l Cuantas veces al afio vienen oficiales o autoridades de afuera a visitar Pomatambo? 6Para que vienen?

4) 6Cuales son unas ventajas o desventajas de tener un camino mejor entre Vilcashuaman y Pomatambo en los ultimos afios?
5) 6Que tipo de vehiculos vienen a Pomatambo y para que vienen?

6) 6Cuales son unas de las cosas o productos de fuera de Pomatambo que usted tiene en casa? 6Cuales son unas de las ventajas o desventajas de
esas cosas?

7) l Cua! es la cosa mas importante que el gobierno ha hecho para Pomatambo en los ultimas afios?

8) Hay autoridades de varios niveles: el gobierno nacional, el gobierno del departamento de Ayacucho, el gobierno de la provincia y el distrito
de Vilcashuaman, y las autoridades en Pomatambo. i,En cual de estos niveles de gobierno tiene usted la mas confianza? i,En cual de los
niveles tienes menos confianza? i,Por que?

9) Podemos decir que, al mismo tiempo, usted es pomatambino/a, vilquino/a, ayacuchano/a, quechuahablante, peruano/a, y latinoamericano/a.
i,Cual de estas identidades es mas importante para usted y por que? i,Segundo? i,La menos importante de todas?

10) i,Que significa para usted ser
pomatambino/a?
i, vilquino/a?
i,ayacuchano/a?
i,peruano/a?

11) i,Cree usted que es importante aprender quechua y la cultura indigena en la escuela? i,Muy importante? i,NO tan importante? i,Por que?

12) i,Cuando cree usted fue la mejor epoca en el pasado/en la historia aquf? i,Por que?

13) i,Quienes fueron sus antepasados?

Appendix 3: Summary chart of survey responses
el gobiemo nacional (2), el gobiemo de! departamento de Ayacucho(l), neutral, apathetic or equal (0) el gobierno de la provincia y el distrito de
Vilcashuaman (-1 ), y las autoridades en Pomatambo (-2)
pomatambinola (0), vilquinola (1), ayacuchanola(2), quechuahablante (3), peruanola(4), y latinoamericanola(5), all equal, depends separate
8
2,1, leastin-1

9
All equal

11

12

13

Todo,
caste llano,
letra,
nurnero
English,
Spanish,
All the
dialects,
Aymara,
Huanca,
observed
Cuzco
Quechua is
the purest

NIA

NIA

Casi nada,
forgot

No sabemos

1

AV

63

F

0

Agric

3 months

7
Health post, road

2

FCR

72

M 5

Agric

3,4 years?

Nothing

0

Equal

0,3
because of
culture.
Others
depend on
location
Depends
on context

Quechua

Velasco, gave
sardines to
children

Spaniards,
Quechua blood

NIA

Time of
grandparents,
healthier
cattle, but
worse
education
Time of
abuelos,
padres, better
agriculture
Time of
abuelos

Bisabuelos

Autho
rit.

3

QNQ

42

M 16

Teach
er,
Sch.
Drct.

From Pujas,
28

Milk program,
potable water,
leveling of
plaza, roof of
communal
house, school

-1

4

XI

43

M 8

Agric

0

NIA

-1

5

VGC

54

M 14

Agric

10

Knowledge
about terraces,
X2

-1, I

Depends
on context

Bilingual

6

X2

39

F

Agric

0

Terraces, work

NIA

Depends
on context

Quechua

5

for men, women,

Ancestors,
consanguinedad
, comunidad

NIA

7

X3

15

F

Stude
nt

8

barbed wire,
reforestation
X2, VGC

NIA

Depends
on context

Quechua
and
Spanish

Time of
Abuelitos
Abuelitos or
before, less
education
then, but
healthier
food, cattle,
harvests
Fujimori

8

MRT

55

F

8

Agric

27

X2, VGC

-2, -1

Depends,
but 2
mainly

NIA

9

MRP

26

M 4

Maest
rode
music
a

0

Potable water,
health post

-2

0,3

Teach
"pure"

10

ATN

21

M 10

Cuy
farme
r

11

At first, said no
hay, but then
health post and
potable water

-2

0,3, birth

11

SNP

49

M 2

Agric
. First
new
Varay
o.

5

-2

NIA

12

SRP

18

M 10

Agric

4

At first said
"nada de!
gobiemo, no hay
apoyo" later said
health post and
potable water,
casita social,
cement
Road, Potable

Quechua,
combine
with
Spanish,
English
Teach
"pure
Quechua
"here
and in
Lima,
also
English
and
Spanish
Yes

-1, least with

I, least

Yes

NIA, use only
for anecdotal
evidence
No sabemos

MamaOcllo
and other Inka
figures

Fujimori
because of
aid, colegios

Manco Capac,
Atahualpa, et al.
Conquistadores
introduced
Spanish

NIA

NIA

Contemporar

Incas

Water
Road, Potable
Water
Road, Potable
water
Pronamachs,
reforestation

EN
M
14 RM
G
15 CVP

27

M 5

Agric

0

21

M 13

Agric

39

M 6

Agric

5, Pujas,
study
12

16

27

F 6

Shop

0

Nada

17

42

F 4

Agric

7,
Colpapamp
a

PRONAMACH

18

84

F

0

Agric

.5-lmonth,
Lima

19

60

F

0

Agric

0

Agric

13

WJR

20

RGH

75

F

21

IPN

73

M 10

Agric

Lima
-1, least Lima
-1, least in Lima
Lima/Huamang
a give most aid,
but we don't
trust either
No one has
done anything

with 5
1, least
with 5
1, least
with 5
0

3

Yes
Yes
Quechua
and
Spanish
Quechua
and
Spanish
Quechua,
Quechua
writing

y epoch
Contemporar
yEpoch
Contemporar
y Epoch
Before the
violence

Don't know,
but worst was
violence
Before the
violence
when it was
peaceful
20 years
before, all
respected
each other,
didn't drink
as much
Is the same as
now

Incas
Incas
Abuelitos,
unidos in
alegria
Abuelos

NIA

-2

0

No hanhecho
nada

None are bad,
don't really
know, not
informed

2,1

Nose

10,
Antapite,
Parcco
10-15,
Huaccana

Ninguna obra

In none, don't
really know

0

Yes

No hahecho
nada

-2 because
speak with them

Yes

When she
was young

NIA

10, Lima

NIA

-2, formerly
village officer

0 because
where I
live with
my
husband
0, also
Lima,
where his
nephews
are,
helping
with
remittance

English
too,
Quechua,
Spanish

Better before,
with
authorities,
we worked
together, now
people work
for
themselves,

Mayores, taught
social graces

s

I don't know
very well

NIA

22

JRP

30

M 3

Road

7

23
24

TNS
AGN

84
85

M I

Agric
Agric

0
5

M 1

Only roads

(P needs to be its
own district with
own council,
doesn't like
being under
Vilcas)
Welcomes
Pronamachs

-2, -I

s
5, others
equal

-2,-1
-2

0
0

Quechua

not hospitable
Better now
compared to
last 20 years

Abuelos

