University of Pennsylvania

ScholarlyCommons
Anthropology Senior Theses

Department of Anthropology

Spring 2007

Communication and Collaboration: How Relationships Between
Local Populations and Environmental Non-Governmental
Organizations Could Be Improved
Katie Hawkes
University of Pennsylvania

Follow this and additional works at: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses
Part of the Anthropology Commons

Recommended Citation
Hawkes, Katie, "Communication and Collaboration: How Relationships Between Local Populations and
Environmental Non-Governmental Organizations Could Be Improved" (2007). Anthropology Senior Theses.
Paper 89.

This paper is posted at ScholarlyCommons. https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/89
For more information, please contact repository@pobox.upenn.edu.

Communication and Collaboration: How Relationships Between Local
Populations and Environmental Non-Governmental Organizations Could Be
Improved
Disciplines
Anthropology

This thesis or dissertation is available at ScholarlyCommons: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/89

COMMUNICATION AND COLLABORATION:
HOW RELATIONSHIPS
BETWEEN LOCAL POPULATIONS AND
ENVIRONMENTAL NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
COULD BE IMPROVED

By
Katie Hawkes

In
Anthropology
Submitted to the
Department of Anthropology
University of Pennsylvania
Thesis Advisor: Dr. Clark Erickson
2007

ABSTRACT
In a world increasingly beleaguered by deforestation, pollution, global warming and other threats
to the environment, we must take every possible step toward the conservation and sustainable
management of our planet. Governments, environmental non-governmental organizations, and
local communities must all work together in the pursuit of this common goal. Even with such
cooperation, however, problems arise during the implementation of projects designed to protect
land and resources used by local and indigenous communities. Many of these difficulties are
caused by ideological conflicts between conservation organizations and the local communities
with which they work, issues that appear repeatedly in the history of such interactions. In this
thesis I explore the framework of conservation, including the role of governments, environmental
non-governmental organizations (ENGO's), and local populations. This is followed by a history
of the relationships between ENGO's and the local and indigenous communities with which they
often collaborate. Finally, using a series of three case studies including one that I conducted in
Monteverde, Costa Rica in the fall of 2006, I make suggestions as to how these relationships
could be improved, ideally creating an interactive framework appropriate to the expansion and
change that the field of conservation is experiencing in the 21 st century.

INRODUCTION
In an age when income and industry are hallmarks of development, when anthropogenic
chemical and gas emissions are altering every biogeochemical process on earth, when clean,
fresh water is running out and the other natural resources that sustain us are in peril, it is
imperative that we take every step we can toward the conservation and sustainable management
of our beleaguered planet (Vitousek et.al. 1997). This undeniable truth has been the driving
force behind an ever-expanding environmental movement: the last few decades have witnessed
the transformation of environmental protection from a foreign notion into a household issue with
concepts like recycling, "wasting water," organic produce, and more (Read 1999, Whole Foods
2003). Countries worldwide have established countless environmental agencies, organizations
and foundations whose goal is to safeguard the environment and natural resources.
Conservationists, motivated by the need to maintain the biodiversity of the world's diverse
habitats, have motivated the creation of hundreds of nature preserves in developed and
developing countries (Borgerhoff Mulder and Coppolillo 2005).
With this progress, however, come inevitable glitches in implementation. Two major
players in the world of conservation are environmental non-governmental organizations (NGO's
or ENGO's) and the local and indigenous communities with which they frequently work.
Throughout the past decades of reserve establishment, the hope has been that together these
powers can create nature preserves that protect habitat, biodiversity and resources while also
sustaining the local population (World Wide Fund for Nature 2006, Dove 2006). Historically,
however, ideological differences have contributed to problems in implementation of
conservation programs as well as substantial friction between the two groups (Johnston 2006,

I

Redford and Mansour 1996). This paper is ultimately an examination of that dissent as well as
an attempt to discover, through specific case studies, recommendations for its resolution.
In Part I of this thesis, I describe the organizational framework of conservation and the
roles of different actors and stakeholders therein, including governments, ENGO's, and local
communities. In Part II, I outline the historical ideological differences between conservationist
NGO's and the local or indigenous peoples with which they work. Part III consists of a series of
three case studies that examine the interactions between ENGO's and groups of local people in
different Latin American countries, including one case study based on field work I conducted in
Monteverde, Costa Rica in the fall of 2006.. In Part IV, I discuss these case studies and the
conclusions that can be drawn from them, highlighting recommendations for the improvement of
relationships between ENGO's and local communities involved in the implementation of
conservation programs.

PART I: THE FRAMEWORK OF CONSERVATION
Although heralded by noted naturalists since the mid-19 th century, the pollution, degradation and
destruction of habitats worldwide has only recently become a subject of national and
international concern (Salzman and Thompson 2007, BorgerhoffMulder and Coppolillo 2005).
As a result, unprecedented efforts at conservation have taken place. Newly established
environmental agencies in various countries have promoted the passing of legislation curbing air
pollution, water pollution, release of toxic substances, and other negative environmental
externalities of industry. More efficient waste management solutions are continuously being
sought, and endangered species are increasingly acquiring legal protection (Salzman and
Thompson 2007). Moreover, many countries have responded to environmental threats by
establishing nature preserves: areas of land where human activity and economic use have been

2

limited or banned altogether. In 1978, the International Union for the Conservation of Nature
(IUCN) introduced the blanket term "protected area" to describe these preserves. However, not
all protected areas are the same. Some operate under the "people-free park" philosophy of
conservation, which essentially walls off a protected area from all use but scientific research. In
other cases, government policies allow a variety of land use strategies within parks, from
recreation to limited hunting and extraction to sustainable logging (BorgerhoffMulder and
Coppolillo 2005). The IUCN addressed these differences by dividing the spectrum of protected
areas into six different categories according to the number of restrictions placed on human
activities within each class (Table L 1) (Borgerhoff Mulder and Coppolillo 2005). This system
was revised and simplified in 1994, altered mainly to acknowledge that the owners and managers
of these areas were no longer solely governmental agencies, but rather included NGO's,
corporations, individuals, local communities and indigenous groups (BorgerhoffMulder and
Coppolillo 2005).
Although definitions of conservation differ from person to person and can incorporate
pollution control, waste management, toxic substance regulation and a number of other steps
toward environmental protection, for the purposes of this paper I define "conservation" as the
formation of any of the reserve types described in Table 1.1. I use this definition because, as I
will explain later, the idea of "conservation" to a biologist consists largely of the protection of
biological diversity. Thus, the formation of reserves as perpetuated by environmental NGO's is
generally accomplished with the goal of maintaining biodiversity and the ecosystems that sustain
it. Accordingly, "conservation efforts" as evaluated later consist of any political, monetary,
lobbyist or other actions taken by any of a variety of actors with the ultimate aim of establishing
a reserve. These actors generally fall into one of three categories: governments (local and

3

national), non-governmental organizations or NGO's (local, national or international), and the
local people who live in or around a reserve itself. Each of these groups plays an integral part in
the preservation of habitats, biodiversity and natural resources, and before embarking on an
examination of relationships central to conservation, it is essential to understand its general
framework and the roles of the powers involved.
Governments

Little could happen in the way of reserve establishment without the involvement of local and
national governments. These bodies hold the power of legislation, and in the realm of
conservation they can employ this power to establish and administer nature reserves as well as to
dictate the terms of land use therein (Salzman and Thompson 2007, Shafer 1990, Hunter 2002,
Acheson 2006). Environmental NGO's would have trouble implementing projects and creating
protected areas without the help of govermnents; these bodies write the policies that turn a big
plot of privately owned land into a protected area with specific land use strategies and
management plans (Hill 1996).
Governments are, in addition, generally in charge of ensuring that these terms are being
kept by industries and local peoples, an issue which frequently causes conflict when preserves
are accused of being "paper parks" whose rules and boundaries are not respected (Alcorn 1993,
Acheson 2006). Moreover, the authority of governments puts them in a position to influence the
other actors, an ability with a history of both positive and negative consequences. The
relationships of conservation organizations to the governments of the countries in which they are
based and in which they work often dictate the actions that they are able to take. In addition,
local people's regard for their governments and vice versa can influence whether or not their
claims and objections are addressed (Chapin 2004, Borgerhoff Mulder and Coppolillo 2005).

4

Governments also have the power to establish agencies whose role is to protect the
environment and regulate its use (Salzman and Thompson 2007). In the US, these agencies
include the Environmental Protection Agency and the various organizations overseen by the
Department of the Interior (Salzman and Thompson 2007). The US is not the only country to
realize the need for governmental control of the environment, though: further afield, the Costa
Rican government, for example, administers MINAE, the Ministry of Environment and Energy
(Burlingame 2000).
Although the effectiveness of these conservation strategies depends on the strength and
ulterior motives of the governments that implement them, political activism is an essential
element in reaching conservation goals.
Non-Governmental Organizations
Another important facet of environmental protection is the environmental non-governmental
organization (NGO or ENGO). With spheres of influences ranging from the local to the
international, NGO's experience a greater freedom of action than governmental organizations,
constrained as the latter are by their unilateral source of funding (Hunter 2002).
Environmental NGO's, most often non-profit organizations as well, have similar mission
statements despite the varying sizes of their corporations and areas of the globe in which they
work. Their goals include preserving the environment, whether for utilitarian, religious,
ideological or purely scientific reasons. However, even local ENGO's rarely have a single goal
or methodology; most organizations attempt to tackle a variety of problems in a variety of ways.
For example, goals can include the preservation of biodiversity, the improvement of living
conditions and social systems, or the pursuit of sustainable land management solutions. The

5

actions taken by these organizations can include fundraising to purchase land, environmental
education, lobbying, biological surveys, and development projects.
ENGO's usually function at a local, national, regional, or international level, and the
actions taken at these different scales of influence differ subtly. At every level, ENGO's today
work with and provide support to other ENGO's and local communities. The higher the level,
the more the organization plays a supporting and connecting role, although all types ofENGO's
tend to do their own micro-regional field projects. This support can be monetary, technical,
informational, leadership- or planning-based, and more.
Local ENGO's are generally established by individuals in a community or municipality.
They tend to have the most specific goals, undertaking particular tasks and projects to achieve
these goals. An example of a local NGO in my fieldwork was the Monteverde Conservation
League in Monteverde, Costa Rica, which was established by local biologists and other
community members with the goal of preserving biodiversity in the Monteverde area. Their
accomplishments have included environmental education, reforestation projects, and the
acquisition of thousands of hectares of pristine rainforest through philanthropic funding and
debt-for-nature swaps; more information on this organization will be provided in the Monteverde
case study.
National ENGO's are larger organizations with proportionally greater resource bases that
attempt to solve environmental problems on a national level. One such organization is CEDA, or
the Ecuadorian Center for Environmental Law. Although committed to the overarching goal of
environmental preservation that pervades ENGO's, they contribute more legally than
scientifically, focusing on promoting national and international environmental legislation as a

6

means to protect the natural world. Similarly, the projects that they undertake are legally based,
aiding local communities and other organizations in need of legal or informational help.
Regional ENGO's are fewer in number and tend to be active over large areas, usually
covering several countries. Examples of regions include areas like Europe, Southeast Asia, Latin
America, and others; these regional organizations often have satellite agencies in one or more of
the countries in which they work. One example is the Environmental Foundation for Africa, a
regional ENGO founded by the United Kingdom. Based in Sierra Leone, the EF A works to
preserve the natural environment in West Africa. They accomplish this goal through local
projects as well as by providing a supporting, linking, and informational sharing role to smaller
ENGO's.
The largest ENGO's, those that work on an international scope, are largely scientific
research-based, focusing on conservation through the maintenance of biodiversity. Their goals
allow them to concentrate regionally, attempting to conserve areas with high biodiversity and
important and singular habitat types. Like other, smaller ENGO's, they work on a variety of
levels, often with committee-based approaches. Their work with governments includes lobbying
for the creation and management ofreserves, lobbying for better policies and protection, and
furnishing relevant scientific and biological information to facilitate the passing of
environmental legislation. With the most diverse resource and financial bases, they are able to
provide the most support to smaller ENGO's and communities, and also to implement the
greatest number of individual field projects.
The biggest international ENGO's draw their funding from a typically diverse group of
governmental agencies, philanthropic foundations, corporations and individuals. These
organizations are active in countries worldwide with yearly budgets sometimes reaching

7

hundreds of millions of dollars. Though often criticized for the power and financial resources
that they wield, multifaceted, multinational ENGO's like the World Wide Fund for Nature
(WWF), The Nature Conservancy (TNC), and Conservation International (CI) - sometimes
known as the "Big Three" of international conservation - are capable of accomplishing
proportionally wide-ranging objectives (Chapin 2004). With this power also comes the ability to
conceive far-reaching and ambitious goals. Although at their inception and throughout the
1980's and 90's these ENGO's worked largely with governments and local conservation groups,
their goals at this stage are becoming much larger in scope and incorporating many more players.
Governments, corporations, private institutions, local and community constituents are
interwoven into overarching goals of regional environmental conservation, social well-being and
sustainable development.
Local Communities
The people who live around and interact with the environments that conservationists are so eager
to protect are the final stakeholders in conservation decisions. Much of the dissent involved in
conservation implementation exists at this level; as explained in depth in Part II, the goals,
philosophies and ideologies of local and indigenous people do not always match those of
conservation organizations. At the local level, essentially, people either work on their own
initiative or with motivation from ENGO's to preserve the land that they live on and around, a
task that they may undertake for a variety of reasons (World Wide Fund for Nature 2006, Alcorn
1993, Dove 2006).
In many instances in developing countries especially, local communities are made up of
indigenous or "traditional" people, a label which is inherently difficult to define (Dove 2006).
How long must a group of people have lived in an area to be considered "indigenous?" Are they

8

defined by a shared culture and history, or is a shared lifestyle and subsistence pattern sufficient?
Is a concept of indigeneity based on precolonial occupation of a territory too exclusive? Where
are traditionally nomadic peoples indigenous to? Should definitions focus more on "nativeness"
or historic continuity? These questions are debated by anthropologists and answered differently
by dictionaries, organizations, governments and international bodies like the United Nations
(Dove 2006).
Despite the many ways this status may be granted, however, many governments sustain
indigenous people's claims to the land that they have traditionally occupied, giving them control
or private property rights (Redford and Mansour 1996). As administrators of frequently vast and
diverse landscapes, indigenous people play a decisive role in the fate of those lands. Indigenous
groups are not the only individuals to deeply impact their traditional homelands, however; rural
farmers and other long-established demographic groups, such as rubber tappers in the Amazon,
have had the same occupations sometimes for hundreds of years (Cahn von Seel en 2004, Brown
and Rosendo 2000). In short, the land use practices oflocal communities, whether indigenous or
not, have overwhelming potential to impact biodiversity and habitat maintenance, especially if
they are allowed by their governments to exclusively control resource use in the areas that they
occupy (Acheson 2006).
In some cases local people are interested in conservation themselves, enlisting the help of
ENGO's or their governments to protect their territories from exploitation by industry and other
would-be exploiters (World Wide Fund for Nature 2006, Borgerhoff Mulder and Coppolillo
2005). The more common scenario, however, is that of an ENGO approaching a local or
indigenous community to attempt to find conservation solutions beneficial to both the local

9

environment and the people who depend on it (World Wide Fund for Nature 2006, Conservation
International 2004, Redford and Mansour 1996).
Although the idea to officially protect the environment in which they live is rarely that of
the local people, they are essential to the success of any conservation effort. Government or
conservationist action alone is rarely enough to ensure the long-term success of any preservation
attempt, as proven by experience and repeatedly stressed in the literature (Jacobsen and McDuff
1998, Fang 2002, Infield 2001, Mulder and Coppolillo 2005). However, the dissent that
provides the focus of this paper lies within the historical difficulties in reconciling the needs and
desires of local people with conservationist agendas.

PART II: IDEOLOGICAL CONFLICTS
Despite the dire need for environmental NGO's and local communities to work together,
discrepancies due to different goals, philosophies, assumptions, and definitions have negatively
affected conservation efforts in the past. Although the subtleties of these rocky relationships are
numerous, several conflicts have arisen time and again in the history of collaboration between
ENGO's and local or indigenous communities. To each of these conflicts there exists a
conservationist perspective and a local perspective, both of which are essential to understanding
the issue as a whole.
Humans and the Environment: A Sustainable Relationship?

The first of these conflicts involves differences in both philosophies and goals. Despite their
initial reluctance to enter into partnerships, since nearly the beginning of the environmental
movement that swept the globe conservationists realized both the need and the strategic
expediency of collaborating with the local and indigenous people whose practices and decisions
affected the landscapes they were working to conserve (Redford and Stearman 1993). Despite

this realization, the fact remains that no matter how much a biologist may see the logic behind an
idea like working with native people toward sustainability, this type of humanitarian work is
frequently not in their training and also goes against the beliefs inherent in the practice of
conservation for scientific, biological reasons (Redford and Stearman 1993, Jacobson and
McDuff 1998). This conservation that is practiced by biologists and underlies the goals of many
ENGO's is based on the preservation of biological diversity in all its forms (World Wide Fund
for Nature 2006, Conservation International 2004, The Nature Conservancy 2006, Redford and
Stearman 1993). Conservationists define biodiversity in a variety of ways, but in its most allencompassing sense it incorporates the diversity of ecosystems on the Earth, the assemblage of
biological "communities" within ecosystems, the species and populations that make up those
communities, and the genetic variation present in those populations (Noss 1990). An equation
involving human activities that still preserves all of these levels of diversity seems impossible.
Studies repeatedly show the negative effect of hunting on biological community assemblages:
humans tend to deplete populations of prey animals, ultimately impacting populations of large
predators like jaguars, which are often keystone species within the ecosystem (Redford and
Sanderson 2000, Wilson 1999). Defined by Wilson (I 999: 40 I), a keystone species is "a species,
[such as the jaguar], that affects the survival and abundance of many other species in the
community in which it lives. Its removal or addition results in a relatively significant shift in the
composition of the community and sometimes even in the physical structure of the
environment." A source of even more worry is the fact that keystone species are not easily
identifiable, and sometimes they cannot be recognized as such before the effects of their
depletion are observed (Wilson 1999). Conservationists are dedicated to preventing such drastic
decreases in community and species diversity.

II

Hunting is not the only human activity that negatively impacts natural ecosystems,
however. Farmers have been clearing land, frequently by destructive slash-and-bum techniques,
and engaging in subsistence and for-profit farming for centuries. The concept of "sustainability"
in farming and forestry is hotly debated: in theory, "sustainable" agriculture and extraction
should impact their environments as minimally as possible. This includes methods executed in
such a way as to prevent ecosystem destruction and to permit the continued use of the land or
resource. Some authors attempt to define it, but biologists denounce it as an impossibility
because it is impossible to know without long-term data just what an ecosystem can or cannot
sustain (Struhsaker 1998, Redford and Stearman 1993). For this reason, although cooperating
with local populations to find sustainable, low-impact landscape use solutions may be the only
way forward for conservation, it will always be second best for conservationists; environmental
preservation without use remains their number one priority (Redford and Sanderson 2000).
Because of these beliefs and because conservationists are frequently obligated to work with local
populations, these people are often seen as more of an obstacle to be overcome than a possibility
for fruitful relationships (Chapin 2004). Local people interpret this mindset as conservationists
corning to the community to push their own agendas under the veneer of collaboration (Chapin
2004).
The flip side of this coin is the local and indigenous rejoinder to these misanthropic
opinions about the status of the environment and the results of resource use. The bottom line, of
course, is that humans are here to stay; and when it comes to the most endangered habitats on
Earth, the most common choice is between working toward sustainability and clear-cutting,
cattle ranching or other wholly destructive land use practices (Schwartzman et. al. 2000). The
other extreme, evicting local or indigenous people from land that they have occupied for

12

hundreds or even thousands of years is difficult if not impossible to justify with any
humanitarian feeling and leads to calamitous social consequences (West et. al. 2006). Local
populations and the authors who support their claims also maintain that the effects of their
activities on the environment are exaggerated by biologists; hunting and extraction have a much
less dire impact than conservationists believe (Schwartzman et.al. 2000). Moreover, local and
indigenous populations cite as a main reason for collaboration the reality that destroying the
landscape in which they live is rarely in their best interest, not to mention that it would go
against the ideologies that for centuries have maintained that landscape for use (Western and
Wright 1994). They profess themselves to be much better stewards of nature than governments,
who often use land in their best monetary interest, granting industry and development free reign
(Schwartzman et.al. 2000, Acheson 2006).
The feather in the cap of anthropologists' arguments in support oflocal and indigenous
land use, however, is the overwhelming evidence that humans have been altering their
environments for thousands if not millions of years, and that virtually no landscape on earth is
completely free of anthropogenic modification (Redman 1999, Balee 2006). Furthermore,
studies have shown evidence that this modification can be not only neutral but in fact beneficial
to biodiversity in an area (Mann 2002, Anderson and Posey 1989, Janzen 1998).
despite heated debate over whether or not conservationists and local peoples are actually
working toward the same goals, ideologically conservation organizations strive for the protection
and management of natural landscapes, preferably in the absence of people. Local groups, on the
other hand, are generally working toward the goal of protecting and legalizing land for their own
use (BorgerhoffMulder and Coppolillo 2005). Finding mutually satisfying objectives, therefore,
requires compromises on one or both sides: a difficult end to achieve in any relationship.

13

The Danger of Assumptions
Another causal factor in the unfortunate misunderstandings between ENGO's and local peoples
are the assumptions that each makes about the other, especially on the organizational side.
Conservation organizations, especially those with larger spheres of influence, tend to
view local communities worldwide as somewhat homogeneous. Arun Agrawal and Clark
Gibson (1999: 640) describe this misconception as the" 'mythic community': small, integrated
groups using locally evolved norms to manage resources sustainably and equitably." This idea
assumes similar community structure, composition, and decision-making processes. It assumes
that the interests, political ties, and actors within each community are relatively the same
(Agrawal and Gibson 1999). The truth, of course, is that communities are widely diverse across
regions and even across nations, and treating them as more or less the same from the outset of a
project can only lead to errors in communication and understanding (Agrawal and Gibson 1999).
Other damaging presuppositions historically made by ENGO's include the now-famous
myth of the "ecologically noble savage" (Redford 1991 ), or the assumption that traditional
subsistence methods lacking modern technology and uninfluenced by Western thought and
practice are inherently symbiotic with the environment. Among others negative outcomes, this
assumption led to management plans in which the locals' continued use of a protected area
became contingent upon their maintaining a "traditional lifestyle," a condition termed "enforced
primitivism" and denounced by anthropologists. Despite the fact that the conservationist
community has for the most part recognized this idea as false (Redford 1991, Holt 2005), some
organizations still operate under a similar assumption, leading to predictable hitches in project
planning and execution (BorgerhoffMulder and Coppolillo 2005).

14

Additionally, conservation organizations and local communities alike frequently take for
granted that their goals and priorities in implementing a project are the same (BorgerhoffMulder
and Coppolillo 2005). This is a dangerous assumption for either party. On one hand, it can lead
to local groups not receiving the benefits that they expected out of a conservation management
arrangement (Hill 1996). On the other hand, conservationists dread situations in which a local
group gains autonomy or private property rights and proceeds to use their resources in ways
unforeseen by the ENGO, such as destructive logging (Terborgh 2000).
Examples like these demonstrate the perils of assuming anything about one's partner in a
collaboration situation, but they do not prevent these and similar presumptions from hindering
conservation implementation every day.

Defining the Issues
An inherent conflict that ENGO's often fail to realize in their dealings with local and indigenous
people is the fact that many of the issues at hand- conservation, sustainability, even forests - are
terms defined differently among different groups, and the ideas of those groups often differ
significantly from conservationists' own (Struhsaker 1998, Redford and Mansour 1996, Alcorn
1993).
Sustainability, for example, is a concept debated by many and claimed as impossible by
most strict biologists because how could we possibly know exactly what the environment can
sustain in the long term? Certainly conservationists and local people have different views on the
subject. The former define sustainability as methods of farming and harvesting certain goods
from a landscape in such a way that maintains biodiversity in the ecosystem, both in the species
being harvested and the species that interact with them ecologically (Struhsaker 1998). Local
and indigenous groups, however, tend to have a broader sense of the word, taking sustainability

15

to mean methods of farming and extraction that prevent the destruction of the landscape or the
exhaustion of the resource.
In addition, the idea of a forest, though it seems self-explanatory, can be interpreted in
different ways. When an ENGO wants to conserve a forest, it wants to preserve biodiversity in
all of that ecosystem's components - genetic, species, and community- as well as to preserve all
of its attributes structurally, functionally, and compositionally (Redford and Sanderson 2000).
When local groups and the anthropologists who work with them talk about forests, on the other
hand, they tend to reference them as a group of trees whose function is to provide a home to
people and the animals and plants that help to sustain them.
Lastly, conservation itself is a slippery subject. To a biologist, conservation is
fundamentally the maintenance of biodiversity and the habitats that sustain it. Conversely, many
authors have shown that local and indigenous ideas of conservation differ significantly from the
scientific Western view. According to Alcorn, no word for conservation exists in any nonEuropean language, and it is "generally translated as 'respecting Nature,' 'taking care of things,'
or 'doing things right"' (I 993: 425). Redford's and Stearman's (2000: 253) experience with
local and indigenous people lead them to conclude that to these people, "preserving biodiversity
means preventing large-scale destruction." In my experience among the local residents of
Monteverde, Costa Rica, local definitions of conservation related directly to the individuals'
modes of subsistence. Conservation for farmers involved soil and water resources as well as
trees to provide windbreaks and maintain watersheds. On the other hand, business owners
defined conservation in the vague terms that many of their foreign, ecotouristic customers would
define it: all-encompassing, global concepts like "saving the planet" and "maintaining the earth."
Redford's (I 996) survey at The Nature Conservancy's workshop "Traditional Peoples and

16

Biodiversity Conservation in Large Tropical Landscapes" determined that one common thread in
the definitions of conservation given by the delegates from eight indigenous groups was that of
rational use ofresources that would maintain them for future generations.
In all of these cases, we see a marked concern in the scientific community for
biodiversity and the elements necessary to maintain it. The local and indigenous conceptions of
these words, however, tend to be almost unilaterally anthropocentric, defining conservationrelated terms with the maintenance and well-being of humans in mind. Even when the two
groups attempt to work together for goals they perceive to be common, these disparities in
ideology can lead to one or both sides becoming disillusioned with the outcomes.
The Economy of Conservation
The economic side of conservation, although rarely addressed in-depth by anthropologists, is a
factor to be ignored at the peril ofENGO's. With wildly different cultures, educations, and
socioeconomic backgrounds, conservationists and local and indigenous people often find it
difficult to see eye to eye and understand each others' behaviors when [dealing with] these kinds
of issues (Borgerhoff Mulder and Coppolillo 2005).
Conservationist ideologies are based in part on economic principles. In the US, suddenly
aware of the polluted and overexploited state of our environment, we are doing all we can to
inform, tax, bully, coax, and legislate our way out of environmental degradation (Salzman and
Thompson 2007). Many of the problems we are experiencing are caused by what Hardin (1968)
infamously called the "Tragedy of the Commons," a problematic social phenomenon wherein
each individual, acting in his own self interest, exploits a common good to the detriment of all
(and in the case of natural resources, the eventual depletion of the resource). The assumption that
individuals will act in their own self interest is a building block of Western economic theory, and

17

it therefore plays a large role in the implementation of conservation practices: essentially, either
conservation must somehow be in local people's best interest, or there must be some strong noneconomic factors encouraging them to be altruistic (Borgerhoff Mulder and Coppolillo 2005).
This is problematic because without taking ecosystem services into account, the economic
benefits of conservation, especially with low-impact or no extraction, are neither great nor
available in the short-term. The perceived future economic value of a forest, for example, is
often less than the owner could gain by simply cutting it all down and selling the timber
(Acheson 2006). Moreover, a person's valuation ofa good decreases as a function of the amount
of time he or she must wait to collect the benefit, a concept referred to as a discount rate
(BorgerhoffMulder and Coppolillo 2005). According to this principle, twenty dollars in your
pocket now is worth more to you than the promise of twenty dollars in your pocket a month from
now, because anything could happen in the interim: you could die, the price of your good could
change, that good could even be destroyed. By the same token, the revenue from clear-cutting a
forest today is often worth more to someone than sustainably logging it for twenty years.
Depending on age, sex, socioeconomic status and other variables, different people are expected
to value future benefits differently, but in most cases individuals are expected to forgo long-term
benefits for short-term ones (Borgerhoff Mulder and Coppolillo 2005). These expected
economic valuations are not the only factor in decision-making, but they understandably play a
large part in how people decide to manage their resources. Given this understanding of
individual behavior as determined in part by economic self-interest, it is no wonder that
conservationists question whether local and indigenous people will conserve their resources if
given control over their disposal (Redford and Sanderson 2000).

18

Anthropologists counter these economic arguments with the observation that many
societies not wholly assimilated into Western thought do not operate under the same principles,
and the assumptions that underlie Western economic theory can't be used to predict their
behavior (Chapin 2004, Chapeski 1995). In some sense this is true: anthropologists have shown
that common-pool resource use and conservation is often maximized in harsh, resourceconstrained environments like highly acidic blackwater areas of the northwest Amazon region
and dry savannas of central Brazil (Stearman 1994, Borgerhoff Mulder and Coppolillo 2005). In
addition, anthropologists and indigenous people alike cite historically successful management of
resources on ancient homelands as evidence of the unlikelihood of their overexploiting these
resources in the future (Schwartzman et. al. 2000, Redford and Stearman 1993).
However, these rejoinders only apply to a small minority of indigenous groups; they fail
to take into account non-indigenous local groups as well as more Westernized indigenous groups.
Moreover, exposure to Western societies based on monetary wealth, escalating ties to market
economies, and growing populations due to the introduction of better medical techniques are
increasing pressure on natural resources and inclination toward overexploitation in even more
traditional indigenous societies.
Holt (1999) answers to these inconsistencies in a novel way: she maintains that the views
held by conservationists on the type of low-population-density, low-impact traditional
indigenous peoples generally held to be "conservation friendly" are actually a Catch-22. Using
the same Western ideas of common property theory that underlie conservationist thought and
supporting her claims with evidence from the Huaorani of Ecuador, she argues that indigenous
groups with limited technology, basic subsistence economies and low population densities are
those least likely to foster conservationist ideals. Rather, people with improving technologies,

19

market involvement and greater population density- those commonly held by ENGO's to be
inimical to conservation goals - are more apt to realize the need for resource stewardship and
promote conservation. Further, she points out the hypocrisy in viewing Western culture as both
the problem (causing indigenous peoples to buy guns, drink Coca-Cola and amass monetary
wealth) and the solution (being the umbrella of authority under which conservationists assume
themselves to be qualified to make decisions about how native people should manage their
resources) (Holt 1999).
In the end, conservationists see themselves faced either with the difficult task of putting
conservation into an economically beneficial framework for local people, or the equally complex
task of appealing to some inherent moral, ethical or religious belief held by local people that
would encourage them to conserve their resources. This struggle, exacerbated by the fact that
creating economic benefit inevitably involves some level of destructive practices, only serves to
worsen the conservationist perception of local people as obstacles to overcome rather than
partners and aides. On the flip side, conservationists discourage local and indigenous people
from become Westernized, while at the same time ENGO's wield their Western educations and
perspectives as tools that grant them the ability to decide the fate of others' resources.
These conflicts and a variety of others arise repeatedly in the implementation of
conservation projects; their effects detract from the success of those programs, and the vast
majority of environmental NGO's experience years of trial and error before finding one or two
conservation projects that succeed (Cahn von Seelen 2004, Redford and Mansour 1996). By
analyzing the following case studies of relationships between conservationist organizations and
the local communities with which they attempted to collaborate, I will suggest possible strategies
to lessen or alleviate the impacts of these debilitating conflicts.

20

PART III: CASE STUDIES
Three case studies provide examples of both positive and negative relationships between
ENGO's and local and indigenous communities. The first is a case study of an indigenous group
in Paraguay and a national ENGO. The second case study evaluates the perspectives of
conservation policy makers, policy implementers, and the local population obliged to live with
policies near a nature preserve in southern Mexico. The third case study, my own, examines the
development of conservation by interviewing different groups of local inhabitants in Monteverde,
Costa Rica.
CASE STUDY #1: THE ACHE OF PARAGUAY
The first case study is based on one of a series of evaluations that were commissioned by The
Nature Conservancy as part of a campaign to realize more effective partnerships between the
organization and indigenous peoples. These evaluations, written by well-known and respected
social scientists in conjunction with indigenous people, culminated with a workshop entitled
"Traditional Peoples and Biodiversity Conservation in Large Tropical Landscapes," where the
evaluations were presented and discussed. The purpose of this workshop was to examine the
relationship between The Nature Conservancy's mission of conservation and the needs and
desires of indigenous groups. This workshop was attended by the authors of the case studies,
representatives from The Nature Conservancy, and representatives of eight indigenous groups
from seven countries in Latin America. The proceedings from this workshop as well as the case
studies were published in 1996 (Redford and Mansour 1996).
The evaluation below, written and presented at The Nature Conservancy's workshop by
anthropologist Kim Hill (Hill 1996), details the rocky relationship between The Nature
Conservancy, its locally active satellite ENGO, and the indigenous Ache people in regard to the

21

Mbaracayu Nature Reserve in the southeastern part of Paraguay.

Hill conducted this study with

the help ofTiko Tikuarangi, an Ache who was born in the Reserve and served as the main chief
of one of the nearby communities from 1990 to 1995. The case study is based on Hill's
experiences while engaged in a research project to measure and monitor edible resource (animal
and plant) densities and how human activities impacted those densities within the Reserve. I
focus my analysis on Hill's recounting of historical and cultural details about the Ache as well as
his observations about the relationship between conservationists and native peoples assimilated
during twenty years of research experience with native populations in Paraguay, Peru, and
Venezuela.

THE MBARACAYU RESERVE
Conservation is of low priority in the Paraguayan government. As in many developing nations,
many official policies discourage it in favor of rapid resource exploitation. The law protects only
individuals who make "rational use" of their property, which incorporates intensive strategies
such as clear-cutting for agricultural use but does not include sustainable use of primary forest.
Anyone who keeps their land forested is not considered to be using their landholding rationally,
and in reality the only way to prevent expropriation of land in Paraguay is to clear-cut and use it
for pastureland or agriculture. A few government agencies are charged with protecting the
environment and natural resources, but due to their lack of official support, these agencies are
underfunded, understaffed and generally ineffective. Because of this, nationally declared
conservation areas are often subject to illegal occupation and immigration as well as hunting and
extraction by inhabitants of communities nearby.
Environmental non-governmental organizations, however, tend to enjoy a greater
measure of power. Often drawing from the wealthy Paraguayan elite, employees are more

22

highly educated and better paid than those of governmental groups. Board members and donors
are commonly among the most influential people in society, and as a result the ENGO's are
much more effective than their governmental counterparts. The high socioeconomic status of
many ENGO members, however, has created a history of mistrust and resentment among the
peasant and indigenous populations whose destructive land use practices are often the target of
conservationist policies and programs.
One ENGO exhibiting these qualities is the Fundaci6n Moises Bertoni (FMB), a
Paraguayan national organization founded in 1988 by former government workers in conjunction
with The Nature Conservancy. These individuals, formerly employed by the ineffective
government agencies described earlier, wanted to create an organization that carried more weight
and enjoyed more success. The ENGO enlisted the help of USAID, which provided initial
funding for institutional development, and TNC, who provided funding and organizational
training. This association with the respected international ENGO also drew qualified individuals
to FMB, leading to increased status and salary among employees and attracting the support and
participation of the social and economic elite. Such a status earned the FMB the leverage they
needed to carry out their conservationist goals, the first of which materialized in the form of a
large land purchase with international funds. They also created a satellite ENGO, the Fundaci6n
Mbaracayu, to receive the land title, obtained permission from the government to manage the
property, and eventually convinced the Paraguayan government to pass legislation officially
protecting the land. Through an agreement between the United Nations, The Nature
Conservancy, the FMB, and the Paraguayan government, the Mbaracayu Nature Reserve was
created in 1991. Hill does not mention whether the Ache played any part in this process.

23

The Mbaracayu Nature Reserve ("the Reserve") encompasses 60,000 hectares of forest.
Together with the surrounding 250,000 hectares of the upper Jejui watershed, it forms the largest
tract of undisturbed tropical forest in eastern Paraguay. The area is characterized by rolling hills
covered with evergreen forest and flat valleys dominated by tall broadblade grasses. It includes a
variety of ecosystems including forests, rivers, mountains, caves, grasslands, and wetlands, all of
which contain important biological communities unique to the area. The region is additionally
ecologically important: the Reserve shelters around 90 percent of all of the rare and endangered
species in Paraguay and harbors a plethora of plant and animal species found in no other South
American park

THE ACHE
The Reserve is also home to the indigenous Ache, who according to archaeological research
have occupied the region for over 10,000 years. Historical records show that the Ache
experienced no peaceful contact with outsiders between the Spanish invasion in the 1500's and
the 1970's. The Ache were resettled on mission and government reservations in the 1970's,
where they live today. The current Ache population numbers approximately 700 dispersed in
five separate settlements, two of which are close to the Reserve and involved in its management.
These reservations contain more than just the Ache communities; in addition, each embraces a
small portion of forested land to which the community holds legal title.
The Ache traditionally lived in nomadic, independent small bands which had no fonnal
leadership and a membership that fluctuated. War was an important aspect of life: Ache bands
were unfriendly to one another, and non-Ache people such as the Guarani Indians or foreign
invaders were killed on sight.

24

According to Hill, the Ache hold no religious beliefs about the forest or the resources that
sustain them. Shamanism, a fundamental aspect of many cultures of indigenous Amazonia, is
absent, and medicinal plants are infrequently used. No animals or plants are sacred or taboo, but
myths about animal behavior and animal relationships to humans are common. In fact, one
enduring aspect of Ache culture is the traditional naming of Ache youth, which demands that a
child be named after an important game animal that its mother cooked and consumed during
pregnancy. This practice defies the pattern of departure from cultural norms that has resulted in
the disappearance of so many other traditions - birth rituals, puberty ceremonies, singing, and
traditional hairstyles among others - and it has important implications for conservation. The
Ache refuse to name their children after domestic animals, and because all animals found in their
area are part of the naming system, they insist upon hunting and consuming all of them at least
occasionally, regardless of rare or endangered status. Thus, because of this facet of Ache culture,
"replacing" wild game with domesticated animals is not a viable conservation strategy.
The refusal of the Ache to restrict their hunting patterns also alludes to an important
aspect of Ache culture: the concept of extinction is entirely outside of their realm of possibility.
With their history ofnomadism and low population density, until recently their resource
depletion has been localized, and their only experience with limitations on hunting has been to
take fewer individuals of species that become scarce. In their worldview, a shortage of one
animal is temporary, and thus the Ache simply have to wait for more of that species to migrate
from another area. As a result, they have exhausted the populations of nearly all game animals
in their reservation forest. The idea that a species could potentially be exploited to the point that
it no longer exists is not within their worldview.

25

Another changing aspect of Ache culture with important implications for conservation is
their economy and associated resource use patterns. Originally their economy centered on the
hunting of game animals, the extraction of wild honey, insect larvae, and palm starch, and the
collection of seasonal fruits. The current economy includes these practices as well as swidden or
slash-and-bum agriculture and the raising of domestic animals including chickens and pigs,
which were introduced in the last 15 years. There is, however, a generational gap in Ache
knowledge and economic practices. The individuals who were children at the time of Ache
settlement on reservations and now 25 to 35 years in age tended to practice traditional hunting
and extraction methods. The younger age group, who were born on the reservation and attended
school rather than foraging during their childhood, have many fewer skills than their parents and
much less interest in hunting. Men in this age group know less about the habits of animals and
the tracking skill necessary to hunt them, and thus make greater use of firearms, dogs, and
fishing, as well as taking greater numbers of small birds. The women of this cohort do not know
how to fashion the customary women's tools and are ignorant of the extraction of palm fiber,
traditionally the main activity of women in the forest. These younger Ache are much more
interested than their predecessors in farming, raising domestic animals, and performing wage
labor. This generational gap and shift in economic practices has not, however, changed the role
of women in the society, who believe that a large and healthy family is the most important goal
in a woman's life and are still mainly occupied with intensive child-rearing as a full-time activity.
The economic structure of the community is geared toward communal ownership and
individual exploitation ofresources. Although resources are community property and as such the
leaders of the community in theory have sole rights to their disposal, they are in reality exploited
unconditionally by all with no community controls over game taken or fruit harvested. This

26

economic structure encourages short-term resource exploitation over long-term management:
you have to take what you can before your neighbor takes it. Moreover, reservation lands are
also hunted and fished by nearby non-native populations, who would exploit anything that the
Ache "conserved" if the latter ever chose to do so. Essentially, although long-term conservation
ofresources would be in the best interests of all Ache, the economic structure in place in their
communities does little to encourage conservationist thinking or practices, and it is likely to lead
to the Tragedy of the Commons. On the other hand, income is acquired through the sale of
handicrafts and wage labor rather than the harvest of forest products for profits.
Chupa Pou and Arroyo Bandera are two communities of Ache located close to the
Reserve. The Chupa Pou community, which holds legal title to 2,000 hectares ofland, has a
political system largely imposed by the Catholic missionaries that live nearby: three elected
community chiefs serve five-year terms, representing the Chupa Pou population to outside
organizations and making resource use and development decisions in consultation with
missionaries. Most community decisions are discussed in large community forums attended by
all adults, although discourse is often dominated by those Ache who have spent time among nonnative Paraguayans as wage laborers or domestic servants. Men in Chupa Pou rely mostly on
guns and dogs for hunting.
The smaller community of Arroyo Bandera, which occupies only 500 hectares, uses more
traditional hunting and gathering methods and interacts less with outsiders than the inhabitants of
Chupa Pou. Their reservation forest has been less extensively logged, but they hunt as
intensively as the residents of Chupa Pou and as a result the area contains little game. Three
elected chiefs represent the community to outsiders, but decisions are made communally with
relatively equal input from all individuals.

27

CONSERVATION AND THE ACHE

Indigenous peoples and Paraguayan peasants alike have little interest in conservation. The Ache
have interacted with only two conservation organizations: TNC and the FMB. Although Hill
(1996: 175) generalizes the historic interactions between these groups as positive, he makes this
qualification based solely on the fact that both the Ache and conservationists are interested in
saving the Paraguayan forest. This assertion is also couched in a number of misunderstandings,
conflicts, and failed conservation and development programs. Hill (1996: 175) ascribes such
difficulties to "communication problems based on language and culture," and he claims
conservationists must take the initiative in resolving these issues.
The main misunderstanding that arose between the Ache and conservation organizations
was due to the fact that the latter did not, for whatever reason, explain to their partners in
conservation what their goals actually were, and why. As detailed above, the Ache have no
concept of extinction, and thus the concept of animal protection makes little sense to them.
Neither do they perceive the logic in preserving a resource that you do not intend to use.
Exacerbating this inherent lack of conservationist principles in Ache culture, no one attempted to
broach with them the subject of biodiversity and ecosystem protection, terms that are completely
outside the Ache worldview. In summary, these people were left with absolutely no conception
of conservationist goals or their importance; instead they saw only the puzzling actions of
conservationists and could simply attempt to deduce, necessarily within the context of their own
beliefs and philosophies, what the motivations behind those actions could possibly be. The
results, unsurprisingly, were often disastrous.
Another important conflict arose as a result of both poor communication and confusing,
illogical actions on the part of the FMB. At the time of the study, the interactions between the

28

Ache and the ENGO had been limited to debates about restrictions on resource use and the FMB
occasionally lending economic assistance to the Ache]. With their limited understanding of
conservationist goals, the Ache failed to see the logic underlying these restrictions, the enforcing
of which was shifting and desultory in nature. Different guards enforced different regulations,
and in fact none of the "rules" they were enforcing were ever explicitly stated to the Ache. In
addition, the Ache failed to see why the ENGO would help them with some activities - such as
planting trees - and not others - such as planting maize. FMB employees implementing projects
had goals, but they did not communicate these to the Ache. Equally destructively they did not
seek any opportunity to learn about the Ache, their beliefs, their social and economic patterns,
and their extensive.knowledge about the forest. A familiarity with these aspects of indigenous
culture could have informed them as to which policies and programs would work best with
respect to the Ache worldview, saving them many years and many dollars worth of effort.
Hill uses three examples to illustrate indigenous economic decisions and conflicts
between ENGO's and the Ache people. The first details the different choices of the Chupa Pou
and Arroyo Bandera communities in regards to their timber resources. The second conveys the
conflicts that arose between the Ache and the FMB over a project involving the raising of
domestic pigs. The last example describes government and ENGO vagueness in writing and
explaining restrictions placed on the Ache, as well as the reaction of the latter group to these
vaganes.

Chupa Pou, Arroyo Bandera, and the Timber Debacle
The history of the exploitation of timber resources in the communities of Chupa Pou and Arroyo
Bandera illuminates several aspects of the Ache economic system, including how the system can
change with different leadership and cultural pressures. Both communities operate under the

29

system of collective ownership of resources described above, but in this case Chupa Pou deviates
temporarily from that pattern, as detailed below.
In 1987, slightly more than ten years after the Ache were resettled onto reservations,
Chupa Pou, the more Westernized of the two communities, acquired the legal title to 2,000
hectares of adjacent land. Inhabitants immediately began selling off valuable hardwood trees to
nearby sawmills, ostensibly without contemplating any future effects of this action. An informal
consensus arose within the community such that any individual who claimed a tree became the
owner of that tree and was free to dispose of it as he or she pleased. These new "owners" of
community property immediately began combing the land for valuable trees and putting claim
markers on them. Local timber entrepreneurs approached individuals and bought "their" trees.
Proceeds were spent on clothes, gambling, parties, canned foods, radios and other luxury
products. By 1988, the community had sold all of its valuable trees and spent the resulting
income. All Chupa Pou Ache lived well during this period, but when all of the profits were gone
community members had nothing to show for their sudden windfall. None of the money had
been invested in the community, nor were long-term improvements made.
In contrast, the Arroyo Bandera community in 1990 also decided that they had legal
rights to the trees on their reservation. At a community meeting the group decided to sell some
hardwood trees to a local timber concessionaire in exchange for a schoolhouse. This building, a
sturdy wood and brick structure with a cement floor and glass windows, was built in short order.
The community then put a moratorium on the sale of hardwood trees from their reservation, a
ban that still existed at the time of the study. In this way, Arroyo Bandera gained an important
community building in addition to preserving much of their timber for possible future use.

30

In 1993, another 6,000 hectares of land were granted to the Chupa Pou community
through the cooperative actions of TNC and FMB. Evidently having learned from their mistakes,
the community members treated this acquisition much differently than they had their previous
land grant. The community, with advice and support from the local Catholic missionaries, came
to a consensus that a small amount of the timber should be sold off and traded for rough planks
of wood to be used in housing and community projects. Because all members were in agreement,
chiefs ruled that no individual ownership or selling of timber would be allowed.
Hill concludes this fable of overconsumption with the hope that seeing the successful
Arroyo Bandera example and the Chupa Pou trial and error, the Ache will realize that
community-wide control of resource use leading to long-term conservation is the best strategy.
However, Hill couches this hope in the caveat that "until the communities recognize both the
problem and the solution, and are willing to cede authority over reservation resources to elected
representatives, overharvesting of community resources will continue" (1996: 169).
A Poorly Planned Conservation Strategy

Hill details the strained relationship between Ache communities and the FMB with two examples
of conservation projects and legislation gone awry. The first describes a program in which the
FMB provided small-scale economic help to the Community of Chupa Pou Ache in I 990 in the
hope of gaining goodwill toward future conservation programs while at the same time achieving
a conservation goal. This program took the form of a community pigpen: the FMB reasoned that
if their supply of domestic meat increased, the Ache would stop hunting so intensively and the
pressure on local game populations would be lessened. With this in mind, the FMB proposed to
purchase for the community a number of breeder pigs and fencing for them. The Ache were

31

charged with the building of the fence and the feeding of the animals, which would be a
community resource. The Ache agreed, and the plan became a reality.
By 1993, both parties recognized that the project was a complete failure. The community
suffered from the classic free-rider problem in economics. Because the pigs were a community
resource and everyone could consume them regardless of who contributed food and care, there
was no reward for those who went to the extra effort of feeding and caring for them. As a result
few took the initiative to care for the pigs, and individuals killed and consumed them at every
opportunity. Eventually the pig population dwindled to nothing.
More frustrating to the Ache, however, was the fact that many adult members of the
community had predicted the failure of the project even before its implementation, although they
did not mention this to the FMB until it had already failed. Similar projects had actually been
attempted at least three times between 1977 and 1990, and each scheme had failed because there
was no way to reward or compensate the individuals who provided food and labor. Thus, the
Ache blamed the FMB for implementing a program doomed to fail, and a community leader
denounced the organization at a public meeting. According to Hill, "'the FMB should have
known that nobody would feed the pigs and they would all be eaten,' that leader said. 'The FMB
deceived us, and they have done nothing to help us'"(l996: 176).
Hill proceeds to point out the errors committed by both sides in this project: the Ache
refrained from telling the FMB before implementation why the project was likely to fail, and the
FMB neglected to research whether similar projects had been attempted before. He also accuses
the FMB of behaving patemalistically and neglecting to discuss the project in-depth with the
Ache under the assumption that they would not be able to grasp or propose solutions for

32

complicated issues like the free-rider problem. The Ache were angry at not being treated like
humans, with human capabilities and intelligence, by FMB representatives.

Vague Definitions and a Variety of Enforcements
The second example of conservationist-indigenous relations is the misunderstandings between
the FMB and the Ache as to how the latter was permitted to use the reserve. Interestingly,
although the FMB began to manage the reserve in 1991 and developed regulations concerning its
use by the Ache, neither that organization nor the Paraguayan government created written
regulations detailing permitted use for the reserve's indigenous inhabitants. The 1991
Paraguayan law that created the reserve simply stated:
In recognition of the prior use of the forest by the Ache indigenous community, these groups will
be permitted to continue subsistence hunting and gathering in the area of The Nature Reserve, as

long as they employ traditional methods, and according to that which is allowed in the
administrative plan of the reserve. This use right pertains only to the members of the Ache

community and cannot be sold, authorized, or ceded to third parties. The members of the local
Ache community will be allowed to harvest species of wild animals and plants that are not
threatened or in danger, under the regulations established for the conservation of the nature reserve.

This use will be regulated by the Honorary Council and based on technical studies and the
management plan of the reserve. The participation of the local

Ache community in the protection

and administration of the reserve will be encouraged, and they (the Ache) will be offered
permanent employment that comes about as a result of the development of scientific studies,

recreation, and tourism in the reserve and the protected areas around it (Law 112/91, Article 13)
(Hill 1996: 177).

In addition to many vague references to the unspecified "management plan" of the reserve to be
developed by the FMB, this law was never translated for or communicated to the Ache, and they
remained ignorant of its contents in the fall of 1994. Although indigenous community
representatives had been present during the process of passing the law, they were not treated
equally. Communicating with them was difficult, and legislators and FMB representatives
assumed that they were too "unsophisticated" to have opinions about the wording of the law.
Despite the lack of official regulations regarding Ache use of the Reserve, the FMB
began developing and enforcing their own regulations in 1992. Although they assured the Ache
that they would be consulted before any regulation became official policy, the FMB did not keep

33

this promise, and the indigenous community was never consulted before the new regulations
became official. In subsequent years FMB employees enforced a variety of prohibitions on
indigenous use of the reserve. Although all restrictions had some justification, some were more
applicable and important than others. A variety of regulations were enforced inconsistently, and
none of them were authorized by any written policy. In addition to these irregularities, a few
regulations were clearly formulated without ecological knowledge of the region. Some of the
game animals that the Ache were prohibited from hunting were locally abundant, contributing
further to the indigenous confusion as to why animals should be protected. As a result,, the Ache
could not help but conclude that the FMB regulation of their use of the reserve was largely
arbitrary. This unsurprisingly did nothing to stimulate trust or respect among the indigenous
community, who worried about the lack of protection of their use rights, the lack of formal rules,
the absence of Ache input in regulation decisions, and the unlikelihood of any of these things
coming about in the near future.
The Ache approached Hill for clarification of many of these concerns when they realized
he was collaborating with the FMB in his projects of monitoring game in the reserve. Their
questioning culminated in a meeting between representatives of the five Ache communities and
Hill rather than a more appropriate meeting between the Ache and the FMB. The Ache raised
worthwhile and perceptive questions including:
 What is the definition of "traditional" hunting and gathering methods? Ache methods of hunting and
gathering have changed throughout the 20 th century and changed even more rapidly alter
permanent outside contact. Which of these is "traditional," and who decides that issue?

 Why are only "traditional" methods allowed inside the reserve? Isn't the important issue how many
animals the Ache kill, not how they kill them?
 If the only activities allowed are those that meet the approval of the administrative plan of the
reserve and the Honorary Council, what guarantee do the Ache have of any use rights? Will
Ache use rights change from one year to the next at the whim of the council? What guarantee is
there that the grandchildren of the current Ache population will have any use rights in the reserve?
 Who is a member of the "local" Ache community and who decides this? Can Ache visiting from
other communities hunt inside the reserve?
 What does it mean to say that an animal species is "threatened" or "in danger," and who decides this?

34

 What does it mean to "encourage" Ache participation in the administration of the reserve? Will the
Ache have formal say in decisions about reserve management?
 How often will the Ache be offered employment? What fraction of the employment that comes up
will be offered to the Ache? (from Hill 1996: 178)

Although the anthropologist could help the Ache address some of their concerns, most of
their questions remained unanswered. Hill does not mention whether the communities
ever brought these issues to the attention of the FMB.
Many problems could have been solved with frank discussion between the groups. The
FMB, however, had internal problems with communication. The high-level executives who met
with the Ache leaders often failed to connect with the local employees who were charged with
protecting the reserve, leading to contradictions and broken promises with virtually no one in the
organization aware of the big picture. These discrepancies led to distrust in the Ache community,
who further distanced themselves from the FMB and complained to other organizations that
FMB employees were dishonest.
Aside from these two ill-fated conservation programs, only two projects were
implemented in the Chupa Pou and Arroyo Bandera communities. Although several other
programs were discussed, they were never implemented. Through some error in communication,
the Ache assumed that these projects would definitely be executed, and when the opposite
proved to be true their mistrust of the conservation organization deepened. To worsen matters,
the FMB never fulfilled the commitments they made in the course of the projects they did
implement. Because the FMB suffered from a lack of materials as well as a lack of technical
and informational support, and also because the Ache had been jaded by too many previous
disappointments, these projects were never fully carried out.

35

Progress Despite Conflict
Even in the face of such ill-fated programs, the FMB has made some headway in the quest to
convince the indigenous Ache that conservation is worthwhile. Although the Ache do not
support most hunting restrictions and most individuals have little understanding of the concept of
extinction, they have accepted some conservationist dogma into their daily lives. In one instance
that Hill witnessed, a chief convinced several members of his community to release endangered
bush dogs that they had captured as pets, reminding them that the FMB had asked them not to
hunt or kill those animals. In another example, Tiko Tiknarangi, the Ache man with whom Hill
collaborated, stated at the INC conference that although he had once hated jaguars as many of
his peers do and would have preferred to exterminate them, he is now willing to let them live in
the reserve. These examples suggest that despite the lack of effective communication and
understanding between conservationists and the Ache, some agreements have been reached, and
it would seem that the Ache are willing to comply with regulations that they perceive to be
logical.
Learning from some of its mistakes, the FMB has improved communication within its
own organization and employees make certain that no promises are made to the Ache that cannot
be kept.
CONCLUSION: SHARING THE INTELLECTUAL WEALTH

Hill concludes with several statements on how conservation organizations and indigenous
peoples can learn from one another. On one hand, he asserts, ENGO's could potentially be a
helpful resource to indigenous peoples, as long as they are willing to be flexible and occasionally
teach important skills unrelated to conservation. He lists a variety of things that in his
experience native people desired to learn: "how national and local governments work, how to

36

lobby for funds and political support, how to take apart a truck transmission, how to clean the
heads on a tape recorder, and what is the best way to treat syphilis" (Hill 1996: 183). In addition,
ecological and scientific knowledge based on experimental evidence and observation could
suggest environmental solutions that indigenous people could not arrive at on their own. Hill
cites the interest of the Ache in learning about maximal harvest theory and life history theory,
two ecological principles that could possibly help them develop sustainable hunting and
harvesting techniques.
On the other hand, the main resource that indigenous people have to offer
conservationists is their extensive knowledge of the forest. Their generations-old knowledge of
tracking, organism identification, animal behavior, and more exceeds the knowledge of
ecologists, who see and study their environment through a different perspective.
Conservationists and other scientists who are willing to engage indigenous people as research
assistants and consultants will be vastly more informed when it comes to making decisions about
resource management.

ANALYSIS
As a result of this case study, Hill suggests the following: (1) improve communication to
negotiate and find common goals, (2) share knowledge, and (3) explore the possibilities of
central control of community resources. While these are worthwhile goals amply supported by
the evidence, his methods are somewhat questionable. Although he describes the interactions
between TNC, the FMB and the Ache as "positive," Hill highlights overwhelmingly negative
examples of these interactions. When he does mention a few positive outcomes of this
relationship, Hill fails to note why the individuals in question opted to comply with regulations.
In fact, Hill's study fails to discuss the reasoning behind the events that took place. Why did the

37

Ache who prevented the hunting of bush dogs decide to comply with the conservationist agenda?
Why did the Chupa Pou Ache behave one way with their timber resources, and the Arroyo
Bandera Ache entirely another? Why did collective action succeed with selective logging but
fail utterly in the pig project? Why did the Ache approach Hill with their discrepancies rather
than the FMB? Why will the Ache abandon the majority of their cultural traditions but hold fast
to the naming system? These lingering questions draw attention to the fact that Hill's study is
less ethnography and more simple observation, which in many cases overlooks the deeper
underlying factors influencing indigenous decisions.
For example, one important facet of indigenous life that Hill glossed over is the religious
belief system of the community. Although he points out that many aspects of the religious
beliefs of ecologically similar cultures are missing among the Ache, Hill does not mention the
religion that does exist. The significance ofreligion to native decisions regarding the
environment is suggested by the pig project. The importance of the naming system, probably a
remnant of an earlier animistic religion, in conjunction with the importance of family that results
in the birth of numerous children, should have indicated to the FMB that decreasing the intensity
of hunting is a more complicated issue than simply supplying meat from somewhere else.
Although Hill explores the economic reasons for the failure of this project, what role do Ache
ideologies and religious beliefs play in their motivation for hunting? This question, like those
mentioned above, probably has a large bearing on the environmental decisions that these
individuals make, and the subject can only be explored through true ethnographic research
among the Ache.
Despite these drawbacks, Hill's study is rich in detail and filled with information about
the relationships between ENGO's and indigenous people. We see all of the conflicts discussed

38

in the second part of this paper: ideological differences, misguided assumptions, and conflict as a
result of differing definitions of ideas related to conservation. Nonetheless, this article is unique
among those presented here for clearly illustrating the complex nature of the last of the conflicts
described in Part II: the economic issues associated with conservation. The economic system of
the Ache should, according to Western theory, lead to the Tragedy of the Commons, which in
some cases it did. However, although many economists suggest granting private property rights
to combat these issues, among the Ache this method only served to worsen matters when it came
to the disposal of formerly community-owned timber. As a result of observing this process of
trial and error, Hill suggests that collectively owned resources managed by elected
representatives are the solution; and yet perhaps a private property approach would have worked
better in the pig example. Economic solutions are rarely as simple as substituting one economic
strategy for another. In this case a combination of economic approaches would have been best,
but it would be folly to assume that this same strategy would work for a different indigenous or
local group.

CASE STUDY #2: THE CALAKMUL BIOSPHERE RESERVE, CAMPECHE, MEXCIO
A second example of the relationships between local people and ENGO's comes from the
Calakmul Biosphere Reserve, a conservation area established by the United Nations Education,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) in the State of Campeche in southern Mexico.
In an ethnographic study, Kristin Cahn von Seelen analyzes the discourses of various local and
national shareholders in conservation. She hypothesized that when groups of people experience
conflict over the use of resources, they disagree about not only material concerns but also
metaphorical constructs like worldview and way of life. Cahn von Seelen's methods emphasize
"observing what people do ... listening to what people say ... and considering how people say what

39

they say" (2004: 14), and her philosophy stems from the observation that conservation cannot be
implemented while dismissing the cultural and social history of the local population. Through
the analysis of interviews, informal conversations, official speeches, life histories, folktales, and
community meetings oflocal inhabitants, environmental and developmental policymakers, and
field-level policy implementers, she makes several conclusions about the relationships between
these groups and suggests that her methods provide a new and useful tool for understanding
resource-use conflict.

YUCATAN HISTORY AND THE CALAKMUL BIOSPHERE RESERVE
Early visitors described the Yucatan Peninsula in southeastern Mexico as wild, sparsely
populated by indigenous peoples, and inhospitable to foreigners until around 1970, when a wave
of new national policies encouraged subsistence farming among indigenous communities. These
visitors failed to see what archaeology and historical ecology later told us: that area of Central
America had once harbored the Mayans, one of the greatest civilizations in history. Moreover,
the region was far from "wild" and had in fact been modified by humans for thousands of years.
In the centuries since the collapse of the Maya states and later the Spanish conquest, the Maya
endured several rounds of forced migration, resulting in an amalgam of ethnic Mayans in
southern Mexico speaking different languages and harboring racial prejudices against each other.
The complex and brutal history of Mexico as a whole did not exclude this region. In the 19

th

century, the Yucatec Mayans of the northern peninsula violently reclaimed the eastern and
southern parts of the Yucatan, making what is now the State of Quintana Roo hostile territory to
non-Mayans and Mayans at peace with the Mexican government until the early 1940's. In that
era, the government established the ejido system of land tenure, under which lands are
communally owned but individually farmed in family plots.

40

Throughout the latter part of the 19 th century and well into World War II, many primarily
foreign powers holding chicle and lumber concessions provided wage labor opportunities for
thousands of peninsula inhabitants, half of whom were employed in the extraction of forest
products by 1940. These concessionaries, the jobs they provided, and the tradition of intensive
forest exploitation that they established profoundly impacted the social, economic, and
environmental conditions in the states of Campeche and Quintana Roo. In areas where human
habitation had previously been solely seasonal, the extraction companies found it worthwhile to
create permanent settlements for their migrant workers connected by their roads and railroads.
Three decades later in the early 1970's, the Mexican government's pro-settlement
legislation instituted land reforms favoring subsistence farming and the ejido system of land
tenure, which officially restored territories to peasant and indigenous farmers. These policies,
which essentially proffered free land in the Yucatan region, were partly geared toward the
settlement of lands in the south of the country, which would help to solidify the border with
Guatemala. As a consequence of this political encouragement as well as instability and violence
in the nearby State of Chiapas, a steady influx of immigrants began to enter the region starting in
the 1970's and continuing through the end of the century. This immigration, primarily from the
Chol- and Tzeltal-Maya speaking parts of the State ofChiapas, has resulted in the establishment
of approximately 70 villages in and around the Calakrnul Biosphere Reserve established in 1993.
More recent international policies that encourage conservation in this region have clashed
with earlier policies emphasizing settlement and farming, creating the conflicts that form the
basis of this case study. These international efforts receive financial support from a variety of
privately funded organizations including the Funds for Natural Protected Areas and the Global
Environment Fund as well as Mexican and foreign ENGO's working within its boundaries.

41

These include the United States-based Conservation International, the Canadian Bosque Modelo,
and the Mexican ProNatura, Naturaleza Compartida, and BioCensis A.C. The majority of the
funding for the Mexican ENGO's is also foreign, coming from private international foundations
and individuals.
Mexico's National Institute of Anthropology and History in 1989 first proposed the
Calakmul Biosphere Reserve to protect the many archaeological sites in the area, which was
officially designated in 1993. Established under UNESCO's Man and the Biosphere Program,
the reserve was one of356 similar conservation areas whose purpose was to "promote solutions
to reconcile the conservation of biodiversity with its sustainable use" (Cahn von Seelen 2004: 9).
The reserve is composed of 723,000 hectares, but today only 5% of that is pristine or high
tropical forest, with 50% more in secondary growth. These densely forested areas are the core of
the reserve that is farthest from the roads; most of the area around these highways has been
cleared for agriculture and cattle ranching.
Zoh Laguna, the village with about 1,000 inhabitants in which Cahn von Seel en
conducted most of her research, is near the eastern border of the State of Campeche. The
population consists mainly of Yucatec and Chol Maya, who mutually dislike one another; the
Chol Maya are considered to be "invaders" by the Yucatec Maya despite historic and prehistoric
evidence demonstrating their previous occupation of the area and subsequent relocation by the
Spanish conquistadors.
CONSERVATION AND THE CALAKMUL REGION
According to Cahn von Seelen, the area of Zoh Laguna "was an ideal place for observing and
interpreting the dynamics of a cross-cultural resource-use conflict, because it is the center of a
region that has garnered considerable attention from national and international organizations

42

over the past 20 years" (2004: 10). During this time, the previous immigration-friendly ethic
collided with the more recent conservationist ethic supported by both the government and
various environmental activist organizations.
Governmental support for conservation in the area comes from two different powers: the
Calakmul Biosphere Reserve staff, which educates local people about fire prevention and the
environment and regulates activities within the reserve, and the Tourism Secretariat, which has a
permanent office in Xpujil, a town 10 km from Zoh Laguna. This group works to promote the
production and sale of Mayan handicrafts as well as to establish the beginning of a tourism
industry, building tourist destinations and training the locals in the hospitality expected by
tourists.
Two main conservation organizations, the Canadian NGO Bosque Modelo and the
Mexican ProNatura-Peninsula de Yucatan, A.C, operate in the reserve. Although the approach
of conservationists in the beginning tended toward absolute prohibition of forest clearing, the
actions of community residents has forced them to adopt a sustainability approach. While on
rare occasions inhabitants resorted to violence to achieve this end, their more common rebellions
have been acts of civil disobedience. Because of the subsistence economy and isolated
geography of the area, environmental resource use policies are difficult to develop and nearly
impossible to enforce. Community members come to meetings held by conservationists, nod
their heads and feign assent, only to return home and simply continue practicing whatever land
use strategies they employed before. This tendency of inhabitants to react against or simply
ignore initiatives that do not interest or benefit them has forced conservationists to take local
needs and desires into account when developing programs and resource use systems.

43

In the l 990's Bosque Modelo attempted to support conservation in the area by promoting
ecotourism, building a guest house for tourists, an activities center, and a "nature path" complete
with ecologically informative signs and two captive jaguars. However, by the time the author
arrived in 1998, this program had been largely abandoned and its constructions rarely used and
overgrown. Although the NGO planned to revamp this project, its status at the time of the
author's experience was illustrative of what has been called the "boom and bust cycle" of both
conservation and development programs, which suffer from gradually decreasing funds and
problems with financial resource allocation. These rather temporary projects, according to Cahn
von Seelen, "might be more aptly dubbed 'initiatives,' for there always seem to be new ones
beginning" (2004: 22).
The Mexican ENGO, ProNatura-Peninsula de Yucatan, has implemented a wider array of
projects and experienced a greater measure of success. Over the last ten years, this
organization's conservation attempts have included medicinal plant workshops, educational radio
programs, a program encouraging composting and gardening among community women, and a
program establishing local organic apiculture. Cahn von Seelen credits the reasonable success
among these programs to the fact that ProNatura learned over time to create and implement
projects of direct economic benefit to the community. The organization also directly involves
community members, employing them as both paid staff and environmental consultants.
The author attributes the failure of ecotouristism initiatives to the lack of local
infrastructure as well as to the fact that the presence of such an infrastructure would make the
community inherently a less desirable destination for ecotourists. She also hypothesizes that the
local population, mostly subsistence farmers by tradition, are interested more in preserving their
traditional way oflife than in making money. They have little interest in service sector jobs,

44

which according to their friends and family pay next to nothing, and they have seen ecotourism
programs fail in areas around them.
Cahn von Seelen notes that although conservationists and government officials stress the
development of a conservation ethic among local people, such an ethic already exists. She
suggests that any recent failure of local inhabitants of the Calakmul region to use their resources
conservatively stems from one of two main causes. The first is the presence of strong economic
incentives for community members to garner short-term profits from cash crops or unsustainable
logging. NGO field representatives especially cite this problem. The second is that local
community residents are resisting conservation as an embodiment of further assimilation into
Western culture.

THE SHAREHOLDERS
Cahn von Seelen's main goal is to understand "where people are coming from" (2004: 27),
historically, culturally, intellectually and ideologically. True to her hypotheses that (I) resourceuse conflicts have a metaphorical dimension as well as a material one and (2) analyzing formal
and informal discourses on the subject ofresource use can provide useful information to policy
makers, policy implementers, and local community members, Cahn von Seelen examines the
way these shareholders talk about issues related to conservation, starting with the creators of
environmental resource use policies.

Policy Makers
While exploring how environmental policy is formulated, Cahn von Seelen examines an
interview with the founder of Mexico's ENGO ProNatura-Peninsula de Yucatan A.C., an
interview with the Director of the Calakmul Biosphere Reserve, and a speech delivered by the
Governor of the State ofCampeche. Prominently featured in all accounts is the perspective

45

gained from flying over the Yucatan area, or seeing satellite pictures. This opportunity allows
individuals to see firsthand the amount of deforestation that has been perpetuated, and as Cahn
von Seelen notes, this experience usually has a profound impact upon those who are able to have
it, informing and strengthening their views about nature. However, this privilege is not available
to the whole population; as the anthropologist expresses, "the view from above not only has a
powerful effect on those who command it; those who command it are themselves powerful"
(Cahn von Seelen 2004: 33). Because such a unique perspective is afforded only to the rich, this
group of shareholders has almost exclusive access to it.
The author's interview with ProNatura's biologist founder, for example, features an
account of her first trip to the Yucatan in the 1960's and her impression of the forest as she flew
over it. By comparing this account to those of author and journalist Graham Greene and cultural
anthropologists Xochitl Leyua Solano and Gabriel Ascencio Franco, Cahn von Seelen
illuminates the differences between accounts of people primarily concerned with social or
cultural issues from those of people chiefly concerned with environmental issues. Through this
analysis she comes to the conclusion that '"nature' is what we project onto it, a mirror for our
allegiances and our times" (Cahn von Seelen 2004: 85). This observation serves to strengthen
the author's opinion that different groups of people have different ideas of nature, and each uses
its own view to support and promote its traditional or ideal way of life.
Next the Cahn von Seel en examines a speech given by the Governor of the State of
Campeche to the campesinos of the Calakmul region at the Town ofZoh Laguna. The speech
concerned sustainable development: past successes, future imperatives, issues and concerns.
Three themes emerged: "ownership of resources; a tension between citizens as clients of, versus
citizens as partners with, the government; and the linking or distancing in space and time of

46

responsibility, blame, authority, power, benefit, and credit to the government and/or to the
citizenry" (Cahn von Seelen 2004: 93). Cahn von Seelen concludes that the speaker walks a fine
line rhetorically, and metaphorically he is addressing a way of life different from his own which
is ultimately at odds with his. He implies that the subsistence farming way of life is neither
ecologically nor economically sustainable. His speech, therefore, is ambivalent: delivered to
farmers, it tries to assimilate them into a political agenda that no longer includes their way of life,
suggesting that the frontier area that is their home is open to one kind of development but not
another. She concludes:
.. .Many paradoxes that arise in his speech - between development and conservation, shared
patrimony and restricted access, plenty and scarcity, future and past - reflect an ongoing
ambivalence about the region's place in Mexico's social, political, and economic fabric, that is

complicated by its designation as a site of global ecological import. [She] ... found that what is
explicitly a discussion by a representative of a currently dominant culture of problems such as
illegal woodcutting contains deeper concerns about the loss not only of trees, but also of that
culture's particular way of life (Cahn von Seelen 2004: 106).

Finally Cahn von Seel en discusses an interview with the then-current Director of the
Calakmul Biosphere Reserve. The director emphasized both the satellite images of the region he
commissioned and the fact that they came from Stanford University, a respected American
institution. In this discourse, four different themes emerged: giving credit and blame for
resource use and misuse; the local conflict between conservation and development; the concept
of adapting to rather than assimilating a conservation ethic; and the emergence of the "Calakmul
generation" born in the region to immigrants. The metaphor in this case is the idea of this
generation: the director hopes it will be a "greener," more sustainable, more ecologically friendly
group of people, a step in a different direction for the inhabitants of the area.
Overall, while those with the most power to affect change within the Reserve and its
surrounding community both talk about sustainability, the crux of their message seemed to be

47

that "the rainforest is imperiled, and that it must be saved from technocrats from outright
obliteration by peasants" (Cahn von Seelen 2004: 88).
Field Representatives: Policy Implementers
Next Cahn von Seel en relates the details of the time she spent with field representatives
employed by locally active ENGO's, those indomitable individuals in charge of actually
implementing projects. She accompanied three representatives of different ENGO's on field
visits in the area, each in the course of implementing or following up on conservation-based
projects. One additional farm she visited on her own.
During her first foray into conservation fieldwork, Cahn von Seelen accompanies Johan
Junge, a German doing summer volunteer work for a Chaipas-based ENGO named Na Bolom.
This organization focuses more on humanities and social issues than the environment: they wish
to renew pride in ancient traditions among contemporary farmers, hopefully restoring the use of
sustainable agricultural practices in the bargain. Junge and Cahn von Seelen visited a "milpa" or
farm under the ejido system, where Junge gathered information for a photographic exhibit that
his organization was mounting at a local Cultural Center. They walked around the large farm,
learning from the farmer about his practices, observing his work, and getting an impression of
what his life is like. Cahn von Seelen is careful to note the different restrictions and expectations
applied to her because she is a woman: because women never go into farms alone or with a
farmer, she must always be accompanied on these visits, usually by NGO fieldworkers,
ecologists, biologists, or families going for the day. She dressed conservatively to avoid
attention and increase the probability that the subjects of her ethnographic study would take her
seriously.

48

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I

that "the rainforest is imperiled, and th'

1
, '

technocrats from outright

obliteration by peasants" (Cahn von S

Field Representatives: Policy Imp!~
Next Cahn von Seelen relates the detiH

field representatives

employed by locally active ENGO'
implementing projects. She accomi'

different ENGO's on field

visits in the area, each in the course,(!f

up on conservation-based

projects. One additional farm she vis'
During her first foray into cbn

Seelen accompanies Johan

Junge, a German doing summer volu
This organization focuses more on hu

. the environment: they wish

to renew pride in ancient traditions

qpefully restoring the use of

sustainable agricultural practices int

j:i Seelen visited a "milpa" or

farm under the ejido system, where J

lphotographic exhibit that

his organization was mounting at a Io

"cl around the large farm,

learning from the farmer about his pr
what his life is like. Cahn von Seelen

strictions and expectations

applied to her because she is a woman
farmer, she must always be accompan'
ecologists, biologists, or families goin
attention and increase the probability

hie study would take her

seriously.

48

Cahn von Seel en's next fieldwork experience is in the company of a woman - - -'"'
representative from ProNatura-Peninsula de Yucatan working on a gardening nr,,i,,;h
local women in the community of La Guadalupe, the designer and former coordinator
-_-_- was on maternity leave. She joins Delia in helping a local woman plant chiles and cila
in conducting an orientation meeting for the front-yard gardening project. Over the c

> this day, Cahn von See\en observes several potential problems in conservation imp le
First, she notes the interesting cultural tendency of Mexican people to avoid confronti

\'./:/,-:---_,,

<

\,_ibontradicting others, especially visitors to their land. Through several similar experie_-_'
<

Seel en concludes that "what sometimes seemed curious behavior to [her] was b
\}J,cies1reto facilitate social interactions and to maintain personal dignity" (2004: 152).
Jfuit0c1~0UlS as this behavior seems, it means people are not forthcoming with what th

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I

information, and occasionally they respond to questions with the ans

their guests feel good about being where they are and doing what they are doi
von Seelen 2004: 152). These behaviors can be misleading and lead fieldworkers to
misinformation. In addition, the meeting the author attended was fraught with misun
First, the timing unknowingly overlapped with another community meeting, a fact of
Delia was not apprised until a few hours before the meeting was scheduled to begin,
the gardening meeting being postponed. Next, the gathering of local women, althou
cordial, failed to understand exactly what the project entailed. They were "accustom
receiving something" (Cahn von Seelen 2004: 160) from "projects" implemented by
which usually involved a grant of money, or at least supplies for whatever activity th
wished the community to undertake. Additionally, in the past women had stated, i

I
I

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I

I
I
I
I
I

explicitly, that in general if they did not receive money for doing something the conservationists
wanted , they did not comply; and the failure of many projects in the area demonstrates that
sometimes even if they were paid, it failed to motivate them for any extended period of time.
Also, they were accustomed to such projects receiving enthusiastic outside support in the
beginning, only to have that support wane with time. Representatives would simply fail to come
back after a while, probably contributing to the community's reluctance to continue with project
implementation on its own. Although frank discourse between the community women and Delia
resolved the issue of what the women would and would not receive in the course of the project,
they clearly harbored mistrust for conservation projects and, as an extension, the individuals in
charge of implementing them.
With Dave Green, an American cartographer following up on volunteer work he had
done for ProNatura-Peninsula de Yucatan, Cahn von Seelen conducted her last experience in
conservation fieldwork. She and Green visited two different ejidos, looking over the apiaries
that they had developed to sell the organic honey in such high demand in the United States and
Europe, an important and relatively easy addendum to subsistence farming that could help
support local families. ProNatura had implemented a project with the goal of showing farmers
that they could improve their honey by having increased melliferous tree diversity on their farms,
and Green had returned to assess the results of this project. He and Cahn von Seel en discussed
with the farmers how the honey is produced, what prices were like, and how they kept it from
becoming contaminated with pesticides and other chemicals, which the European market would
not tolerate. The farmers' words and actions supported the conclusion that they actually believed
the chemicals to degrade the honey- a new ideological development in the community - and
that many farmers had ceased fumigating their hives with this in mind.

50

I
I
I
I
I
I

I

In all these accounts, Cahn von Seelen stresses just how difficult and time consuming
simply getting from place to place can be. Most of the locations fieldworkers visit are difficult to
reach. She provides details about washed-out, unpaved dirt roads; cars with little suspension that is, ifthere are functioning cars to be used at all; and the vast distances and time
commitments involved if one is to visit a substantial portion of a community and observe their
agricultural practices. Unlike many evaluators of conservation projects who simply criticize the
shortcomings of project implementation, Cahn von Seelen sheds light on the obstacles involved
and the reasons why project execution might experience difficulties at the field level.
Local Community Members: Living With Policies

I

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I

Saving the local perspective until last, Cahn von Seelen uses interviews, informal conversations
and personal histories to explore the history of immigration to the area, the implications this has
for policy, the social stratification within the community, and local perspectives on conservation
and Western thinking.
The history of the Town of Zoh Laguna, as described above, involved a primary influx of
settlers to work in the sawmill, and later a continuous trickle ofrefugee-like immigrants fleeing
from environmental, social, and political upheaval in their native state. Because of their
traditional familiarity with wage labor, the author notes that the first immigrants to the area are
more amenable to the idea of conservation and the ecotourism industry it frequently entails. The
later immigrants, subsistence farmers by tradition and philosophy, are more apt to resist
conservation and ecotourism as a metaphorical consumption and elimination of their worldview
and way of life. Cahn von Seelen expresses her view that the conservationist worldview, and
that of the first immigrants and wage laborers, is one in which consumption is not actually
decreased, but rather it entails a way of life that incorporates "displaced resource consumption,

51

or consumption of gasoline and electricity whose deleterious effects on the environment are not
nearly as apparent as those of deforestation, because the oil refineries and power plants are
elsewhere (out of sight and, therefore, out of mind)" (2004: 203).
A social gap exists between the primary and secondary immigrants to the area. The most
superficial facet of this gap is racial: the primary immigrants were largely Yucatec Mayans, and
they look upon the more recent Chol-, Tzeltal-, and Tzotzil-Mayan immigrants as racially
inferior invaders, although this opinion rarely entails anything as radical as violence. The other
feature of the social gap is more demographic in nature: the first immigrants to Zoh Laguna came
for the booming logging industry, and they remember a time when the community was
prosperous, the houses were painted, all the children had proper clothes and shoes. Now they
mourn the lack of jobs, struggling to make ends meet and working to allow their children to
move to other places with more available employment. On the other hand, the secondary
immigrants, the subsistence farmers fleeing from a life in which they had virtually nothing, see
the village of Zoh Laguna as it is now as paradise: they have land, they have relative security,
they can grow their own food and live as did countless generations before them. Interestingly,
the primary immigrants blame the immigrant subsistence farmers, rather than the logging
industry, for the current deforestation crisis.
Much of the local population, especially the portion that survives by subsistence farming,
strongly resists the efforts of conservationists to curb their use of land. To them, these efforts are
hypocritical: the government encouraged them to move to the area, or they arrived there with
nothing as refugees. They feed their families; they do not take more than their share. What right,
they demand, do foreign conservationists have to come in every once in a while and dictate how
permanent residents of the region should use their land? Moreover, why do poor farmers in a

52

developing nation carry the responsibility for rectifying the global environmental problems that
developed countries perpetuate? Why must they sacrifice their quality of life so that industries in
the United States and Europe can simply continue to emit carbon? These questions are echoed
by similar populations worldwide, and there is no viable answer for them.
To conclude her examination of the local perspective on resource-use issues, Cahn von
Seelen analyzes several folktales and one personal history gleaned from the Chol Maya
immigrant community. This analysis leads to the conclusion that in every story, the concept of
over-consumption is associated with moral deficiency. People who want more than their share
of a resource are depicted as being socially destructive. Indeed, within the community the
Western conservationists, rather than the farmers or wage laborers, are perceived as wanting
more than their fair share, "tak[ing] everything [they] see" to fulfill some vague conservationist
agenda; Cahn von Seelen, upon reflection, realizes that "excepting only the poorest of its citizens,
the industrialized world appears to those not living in it as one, big orgy of acquisition" (2004:
224). By analyzing the messages about Chol Maya culture contained in the folktales as well as
the local metaphorical opinion of Western activists, the author concludes that local community
inhabitants have an inherent cultural conservationist ethic based on each person taking his or her
fair share. Thus their failure to comply with Western conservationist agendas suggests not a
failure to adopt such an ethic but rather a resistance to assimilation into a Western way of life.

CONCLUSIONS
From her fieldwork, Cahn von Seelen draws several relevant conclusions about the relationship
between local people, policy implementers, and policy makers with regard to resource use. One
main points is the fact that conflicts over resource use are rarely simple questions of surviving
and getting enough to eat, but rather a larger metaphorical dimension to these conflicts, with

53

each side defending an ideology and way of life. She stresses the need for conservationists to
explore the possibility that local communities are resisting not conservation itself but rather a
Western worldview. In line with this, Cahn von Seelen also suggests that tapping into whatever
innate conservation ethic exists among the local population would be more profitable for
governmental and non-governmental groups than trying to change community culture and instill
such an ethic, possibly incurring the resentment and resistance of the locals.
In regards to conservation implementation, she notes that the main lesson ENGO's have
learned is to maintain constant presence in an area, checking on progress and addressing any
problems that inhabitants experience. Without this regular support from field representatives,
community members are likely to abandon the efforts necessary to make projects successful.
Additionally, she observes that the only projects that have been truly successful are those that
provide clear, direct economic benefits to the community.
Cahn von Seelen emphasizes that to mediate resource-use conflicts and develop
subsequent legislation, policymakers and conservationists need to understand where community
inhabitants are corning from both materially and metaphorically. In her view, doing so entails
examining all aspects oflocal perspectives, including history, discourse, and even the largely
unexplored realm of folklore.
ANALYSIS
In general, Cahn von Seelen presents a thoughtful, perceptive and original work, rife with useful
details and interesting insights. Her perspective, however, is that of an anthropologist, and thus
more descriptive than prescriptive, leaving room for a number of conclusions and policy
recommendations.

54

The relationships between ENGO's and the immigrant population are less strained in Zoh
Laguna than they are among the Ache, and there is less outright conflict. However, we do see
misunderstandings and mistrust in addition to the larger metaphorical conflict involving ways of
life. Like the Ache, the population of Zoh Laguna is wary of conservation organizations, their
aims, and their "boom and bust" cycles of project-implementation enthusiasm. In another
parallel, conservationist goals are rarely stated explicitly to community members, nor is the
nature of help offered immediately apparent to them. In this respect many of the common
discrepancies discussed in Part II between ENGO's and community members are present,
although their occurrence is more subtle and less explicitly stated than the conflicts between the
Ache and the FMB.
Despite the fact that ENGO's have experienced some success and that conflicts with the
local population are not as dire as they could be, some aspects of the interactions between these
groups could nonetheless be improved. The first glaring inefficiency in this relationship is that
according to Cahn von Seelen, only one ENGO - ProNatura-Peninsula de Yucatan - enjoyed
much success, and this with programs as simple as a front-yard garden project, after ten years of
trial and error. Why did it take this organization so much time to determine what would work
within the economic and social framework of the community, and why has the knowledge of
ProNatura not been shared among all locally active ENGO's?
This extended failure of the majority of organizations to determine what projects would
work and how they should be implemented suggests that these ENGO's neglected to properly do
their homework. Had any of the field representatives done research similar to Cahn von Seelen's,
he or she would have stumbled upon some of the deeper conflicts that she revealed. For example,
ENGO members frequently noted problems of overexploitation of forest resources, citing

55

connections to market economies and incentives for short-term gain as responsible. While this
changing aspect oflocal culture is probably related to the destructive resource management
strategies being perpetuated, this single-layered explanation fails to take into account Cahn von
Seelen's discoveries: (1) an inherent cultural taboo on overconsumption, (2) a general lack of
interest among subsistence farmers in making much money, and (3) the ideological resistance of
local people in Zoh Laguna to assimilation by Western thoughts and practices. This discrepancy
suggests that ENGO's are not correctly interpreting the ideas and drivers behind local decisionmaking, an egregious mistake when it comes to the development of policy. If conservationists
do not understand why people act as they do, how can they hope to convince them to act
otherwise? The knowledge of this incongruity sheds light on the reasons why many projects
developed by ENGO's were more or less shots in the dark. The nature of these
misunderstandings and their implications for the outcomes of conservation projects link this case
study strongly with the previous one: in both cases the failure ofENGO's to perceive the deeper
reasoning behind community social structure and decision-making led to frequently debilitating
glitches in implementation.
Contrary to the unintentional implications of many similar studies, however, the
individuals carrying out conservation programs are not lazy, unintelligent, unperceptive or
ineffective. On the contrary, the author's accounts suggest they do the very best they can.
Unlike other evaluators of NGO-local relationships, Cahn von Seelen describes both the
experiences of the local population and the experiences of field representatives for ENGO's.
Through this seldom-seen lens we perceive the effort and obstacles involved in actually
implementing policy: as a fieldworker one is hot and tired, going from house to house on foot or
by unreliable car on bad roads, talking to people as likely to ignore what you say as to take it to

56

heart, trying to convince them of something you believe to be beneficial and right while they
most often persist in ignoring the ostensibly divine light. Although doing so results in the failure
of many conservation projects, it is relatively easy to understand why a field representative might
cease visiting a community with previous frequency, particularly if funding runs out and he or
she believes the project should be self-sustaining. It is not the fault of the field-level underling
that his or her training might not have incorporated ethnography, ecology, or economics. Rather,
the fault lies higher in the organization, with project planners who made unilateral assumptions
about the resources that would be needed to address such problems.
Finally, Cahn von Seel en experienced discrimination because of her gender. Among the
Ache, Hill was accepted, respected, received with equanimity in his requests to accompany
hunters, and approached when community members could not interpret the restrictions on their
resource use. Cahn von Seelen, on the other hand, was obligated to modify her dress and
behavior and to always be chaperoned on her forays onto farmlands. Farmers may not have been
as frank or open with her as they would have been with a man, though this is speculation based
on the knowledge that in few Latin American societies do men have great respect for women.
Regardless, her and Delia's status as women severely restricted the actions that they were able to
take and the people they were able to influence within the community. This very status, however,
allowed them to do several things well: working with women in the garden, advising them about
how to use their house and the surrounding area, and obtaining the depth of folklore and personal
histories that Cahn von Seelen acquired would have been either difficult or impossible had the
author or the field representative been men. In light of this observation, conservation
organizations must think carefully about the type of project they are implementing, and what
type - or gender - of person would be best suited to gather information about or execute it.

57

CASE STUDY #3: MONTEVERDE, COSTA RICA
The last conservation case study is my own conducted in Monteverde, Costa Rica in the fall of
2007 (Figure I). Having spent a number of months in the area before the study began, I could
see that the conservation efforts there had been largely successful, with privately owned reserves,
local and national ENGO's, a thriving ecotourism-based economy, biological research, and the
lives of local people operating side by side with surprisingly few major problems. I also noticed
that the Community of Monteverde was an incredibly eclectic one. This made me wonder how
the different groups of people who composed that community had influenced the development of
conservation there, and whether they played a part in creating its success. To assess the complex
interplay of community elements I carried out a series of interviews with the ultimate goal of
determining how local perceptions of conservation had contributed to the relative harmony
between conservation efforts and community life. With this information I hoped to determine
whether the structure of conservation in Monteverde could either serve as a model or provide
recommendations for conservation efforts in other areas.

MONTEVERDE HISTORY
In keeping with national aims set stolidly on development, Costa Rican property law grants
private property rights to an individual who clears an area of unclaimed virgin rainforest,
creating farmland or making other "improvements" to it. Under this statute, the Monteverde area
was colonized by Costa Rican subsistence farmers in 1915, who cleared much of the cloud forest
habitat to make their living. They had developed a small community by the time that a group of
Quakers from Fairhope, Alabama, arrived in 1951. Allured by Costa Rica's tranquility and lack
of army, they bought a large tract of land and divided it into farms, leaving the highest, wettest,
steepest part forested as a protection of their watershed. Over this patch of forest they

58

established an ownership group called Bosqueterno, S.A. (The Eternal Forest). Fulfilling their
ultimate goal of becoming dairy farmers, they began the Productores de Monteverde, a dairy
plant that still aids the livelihood of small-scale farmers in the area (Figures 2 and 3). Some of
the Quakers were already familiar with soil and water conservation practices sponsored by the
US government; these and the Quaker values that "encouraged conservation of natural
resources" they brought to Costa Rica with them (Burlingame 2000).
Throughout much of its history, Monteverde's remoteness from national and regional
government seats gave it a self-sufficient mentality. Because government presence and decisionmaking were lacking, problems were solved through a series of local organizations and
committees founded for that purpose. These organizations solved community issues through
consensus .. That mentality persists to this day: by 1995, over 40 local problem-solving
organizations were present (Burlingame 2000). However, problems in Monteverde still exist.
Despite the establishment of a local government in 2002, disputes over the use of local resources,
the development of the community, and waste management persist. Unfortunately the local
government, like those in many developing countries, is often loath to enforce laws against
wealthy, powerful, and well-connected community members.
In 1972, the next big step in local conservation took place when Monteverde's first
biological reserve, the Monteverde Cloud Forest Preserve (MCFP), was founded (Figure 4). Its
establishment was largely due to the efforts of a biologist named George Powell, whose desire to
preserve the disappearing forest in Monteverde led him to recruit the help of the San Jose-based
Tropical Science Center (TSC), a national ENGO that is now the Reserve's owner, as well as
various international conservation organizations such as the World Wide Fund for Nature. The

59

Quakers' Bosqueterno was added to the MCFP in 1974, when the Quakers leased it to the
Tropical Science Center for protection and administration.
In 1985, the establishment of the Monteverde Conservation League (MCL) by biologists
with support from local residents added to the successes of conservation in the area. This group
utilized both fundraising and debt-for-nature swaps, arrangements based on developing countries
agreeing to protect certain areas in exchange for either a creditor forgiving some of their debt, or
an organization buying that foreign debt at a discount. In this way the MCL acquired a section of
forest bordering the MCFP, creating the Bosque Eterno de los Ninos (the Children's Eternal
Rainforest) or BEN, the largest private reserve in Central America. Both the MCL and the MCFP
created local environmental education programs, and the MCL also established a windbreak
project, which involved both tree nurseries and education oflocal farmers. In addition to
encouraging reforestation and relieving some pressure on adjacent forests, this program
increased production on participating farms by increasing pollination, decreasing the harmful
effects of wind, and decreasing soil erosion problems (Burlingame 2000) (Figure 5). The
farmers, many of whom make their living by growing fruits and vegetables and selling to the
local Fair Trade coffee co-op, were grateful for this improvement (Figure 6).
Finally, a section of land bordering BEN was leased to the public Santa Elena High
School (SEHS) by the Costa Rican government for a conservation project. In 1992 this land
became the Santa Elena Reserve (SER), which is still administered by the high school. Together,
these four private reserves today make up the majority of the 29,000 hectare Monteverde
Reserve Complex (MRC) (Burlingame 2000) (Figure 7). None of the elements of this complex
are extractive reserves. Each has a small portion that has been developed for biological study
and ecotourism (paths, visitor centers, and research stations), but the majority of the reserve

60

complex is inaccessible to the general public and off-limits to hunting, harvesting, and other
extractive endeavors. Guards employed by reserve owners (MCL, TSC, and SEHS) are
responsible for prohibiting these actions as well as maintaining trail networks.
A history of the Monteverde area would not be complete without a discussion of
ecotourism. Through a series of scientific papers, books, and documentaries praising the area
and its flora and fauna in the 1980's, worldwide interest was generated and tourists began
trickling in. By the 1990's this trickle had become a flood of 50,000 tourists per year, and today
this number exceeds 200,000 (Nadkarni and Wheelwright 2000). Monteverde's environmental
richness and established reserves, coupled with Costa Rica's accessibility and ease of travel,
contributed to the development of the tourist industry that now forms the economic foundation of
the community and the country. This influx of tourists resulted in a boom of local development,
turning the one four-roomed pension of the 1970's into the vast array of hotels, restaurants,
stores, internet cafes, and tourist destinations that exists today (Grosby 2000). Many of the
owners of these businesses have come from other countries to take advantage of the economic
opportunities in Monteverde.
In short, Monteverde is today an interesting amalgam of Quaker dairy farmers, foreign
and Costa Rican business owners (Figure 8), subsistence farmers (Figure 9), wage workers
employed by the tourism industry, and a community of biologists drawn to the rich ecology of
the region, many of whom have inhabited the area for decades (Figure 10)).

METHODS
I set out to discover what community members thought of conservation, what it meant to them
and how it intersected their lives. I hoped that this information would shed light on how the

61

opinions of these local shareholders might have contributed to, or perhaps inhibited, the
formation of the vast reserve complex that now characterizes the area.
To explore these local views and ideas about conservation, I decided to conduct
interviews with local people. I assumed that opinions would differ between the different groups
of shareholders; thus, a simple random sample of community members would not reflect the
variety of personal histories and motivations that have contributed to the development of
conservation in the area. Rather, in such a situation each group needs to be evaluated
independently to create an accurate reflection of community sentiments (Jacobson and McDuff
1998).
With this in mind, I interviewed local shareholders in four of the five aforementioned
groups: five Quakers, ten farmers, ten business owners, and ten biologists. Although the portion
of the population that works in the ecotourism industry also plays a role in conservation, these
four groups are the most likely to make decisions that affect change within the community. This
data collection took place over the space ofa month during October and November of 2007. The
Quakers' sample was restricted to the five original settlers who were still Monteverde residents
at the time of sampling. Farmers were local landowners who had lived in the area throughout
Monteverde's developmental stage, the decades during which the first reserves were established.
Business owners were owners of local businesses that benefited in some way from the tourism
industry. Biologists interviewed had lived or worked in Monteverde for an extended period of
time and were present through the development of the community and the associated MRC.
I contacted biologists and Quakers with recommendations and contact information from
Alan Masters, a local biologist. Business owners were contacted with information from Alan
Masters, with help and recommendations from Alexandra Rodriguez, a local resident and

62

Spanish teacher to foreign visitors, and by convenience sampling. Noe Vargas, a farmer and
administrative worker for the local coffee co-op, recommended farmers to interview, and
Geovanny and Cristina Leit6n, local farmers, provided their contact information. No one
declined to be interviewed, but despite the assurances of various community members that
owners of certain businesses were "always there," these owners repeatedly, on a variety of
different days at different times, "couldn't be found," had ')ust left," or made an appointment
and then simply failed to show up. I did not succeed in interviewing any such evasive owners.
Interviews began with the acquisition of demographic information including name, age,
profession, spouse's profession, education, and number of children. Questions were developed
based on study goals, focusing on the individual's definition of conservation, the place of
conservation in his or her life, opinions on the protection of additional land in the area, and
perceived local problems relating to conservation or the environment (Appendix I). Each person
was given the same core group of questions, regardless of position in the community; questions
were primarily open-ended, and respondents were frequently encouraged to elaborate on their
responses. Interviews were conducted in English or Spanish, depending on the respondent's
preference, and most were recorded on a small tape recorder for future reference. Interviews
took place in the respondent's home or place of business, and seven of the ten biologists
completed the interview in survey form over email.

RESULTS
Because the responses to some questions were combined by respondents, only three categories of
data emerged from the interviews: definitions of conservation, views regarding the protection of
additional land in the Monteverde area, and perceived community problems relating to
conservation and the environment.

63

Demographic Information on Shareholders
The five Quakers had an average age of 77, with a spread from 74 to 83; all of them completed
high school, and one completed one year of college. Four spent the majority of their lives being
farmers and stay-at-home wives and mothers; one man had had a variety of jobs, from farmer to
clerk and distributor for the Cheese Factory. All were born in the United States.
The ten farmers had an average age of 53, with a spread from 37 to 73. Education ranged
from none to the completion of high school, and the majority completed primary school or high
school. Farming was the main occupation for all but one, who also worked at the Cloud Forest
School, a local environmental-education based K-12. The majority had wives who did not do
wage labor but were instead occupied with domestic tasks. All were born in Costa Rica, many of
them in San Luis, a largely agricultural community near Monteverde where they still live.
Business owners were 43 years old, on average; these ages ranged from 28 to 70, with the
majority (n=8) in their 30's and 40's. Four completed college, five others completed high school,
and the man with the least education completed three years of high school. Interestingly, six of
the owners interviewed were not born in Costa Rica; their countries of origin included the US,
Israel, Colombia, Germany, and Algeria. Five of the businesses whose owners consented to be
interviewed were hotels; three owned restaurant/bars and two owned stores. Unfortunately, of
the large, expensive hotels in the Monteverde area, only one owner consented to be interviewed
(Hotel Montana, Appendix II).
Biologists had an average age of 52, with a spread from 45 to 67. Eight often were born
in the United States and eight completed at least their PhD; one completed a B.A. and the last
completed a Masters in biology. Two were born in Costa Rica. Although only five of these

64

individuals make their homes in Monteverde, four of the remaining five are landowners who
spend part of their time there, and the remaining one lives in the city of San Jose.
Definitions of Conservation
In all cases, a definition was more than just the simple explanation of a word. Most people
"defined" conservation by enumerating environmental elements that should be protected, and
many included what they did personally to conserve, even before explicitly asked. Across all
groups, definitions of conservation were largely utilitarian, with each individual emphasizing the
elements that pertained most to their job or subsistence method. Definitions within groups were
largely similar, while the dominant definition in any one group was, overtly or subtly, different
from those of the other groups (Table 3.1).
In their personal definitions of conservation, four of the Quakers discussed the protection
of water sources or natural resources (Table 3.1). During further discussion on the subject they
made clear that this sentiment was related to farming; all talked about conservation in terms of
conserving nature to sustain people in the future, explicitly or implicitly by making farming
possible for future generations. Three perceived tourism as beneficial for the forest, and one
perceived tourism as negatively impacting the environment. One reiterated the sentiments
expressed in Burlingame (2000) that Quaker religious values advocate the protection of nature.
Although their definitions of conservation were also related to farming, local farmers
talked more in terms of trees than water (Table 1). All farmers talked about forests in their
definition of conservation, and nine mentioned reforestation and planting trees as something they
do individually to conserve. Additionally, farmers generally included other factors important to
farming, such as clean water, good soil, and clean air. Seven also brought up animals and/or
birds in their definitions of conservation. All farmers discussed how much of the area used to be

65

deforested, contrasting it to the amount of forest cover now. Several noted that their fathers and
grandfathers did this because they did not know any better. Although only three farmers
mentioned the Monteverde Conservation League's efforts to educate farmers about animals,
plants, and planting native trees for windbreaks, most spoke proudly about their windbreaks as a
contribution to conservation.
Business owners had a markedly different perspective on conservation. All spoke about
conservation and the environment in all-encompassing, global terms. Although many included
references to elements like clean air, clean water, and forests, they did not talk about them as
though these things immediately impacted their livelihood; rather, they mentioned them in the
context of vague, less specific and large-scale necessities such as "maintaining earth," "saving all
parts of the planet," and "lengthen[ing] the life of the earth" (Table 3.1). Their contributions to
conservation for the most part consisted of individual, everyday actions applied in their
households and businesses, including recycling, creating as little waste as possible, and
separating trash. Five respondents spoke of tourism in their definitions, and two discussed
conservation as something that needed to be balanced with business and making money.
Incidentally, these two were both hotel owners, one of which being the largest and most
expensive hotel I was able to interview. This man, in addition, was the only one of 35
respondents to say that conservation was not a part of his life, saying there was nothing that he
could do. This singular case, as well as the evasiveness of the owners of additional expensive
hotels when solicited for interviews, could suggest that the owners of large, extremely profitable
enterprises that take advantage of ecotourism might have different ideas and perspectives than
small business owners.

66

Biologists, unsurprisingly, generally contributed much longer, more involved answers to
questions of defining and contributing to conservation. Their definitions were remarkably
systematic: seven mentioned the protection of biodiversity in their definitions, and nine
mentioned the protection of natural resources or ecosystem functioning (Table 3 .1 ). Eight talked
about teaching, researching or writing papers in their contributions to conservation; all expressed
conservation as a part of their daily lives. Actions like recycling, trying not to overconsume, and
carpooling were repeatedly noted; as one biologist said, "I keep my footprint fairly small" (B.
Haber). Additionally, three have limited their family sizes in part to avoid contributing to
overpopulation.
One sporadically expressed aspect of the need for conservation was the non-utilitarian
idea that nature should be conserved because it is beautiful, because it has a right to be there, or
because it has an inherent value. This idea was expressed by two Quakers, five farmers, two
business owners, and five biologists.
Occasionally expressed in the discussion of conservation was the idea that without the
biologists or Quakers, conservation might not have taken such a hold in Monteverde. Three of
the Quakers expressed the idea that biologists started conservation in the area; one even
recounted his initial feeling that a reserve would not work and that the biologists were wasting
their time. One hotel owner expressed her opinion that the Quakers began the conservationist
feeling in the area, and one farmer felt strongly that without the presence of the Quakers and the
biologists, deforestation for local farming would have continued at its former devastating rate. In
his words, "if it weren't for conservation, if visionary people hadn't existed who started to work
very hard with people, I don't know what would have happened to Costa Rica. At one time it
was in first place among Central American countries for deforestation" (G. Lobo).

67

Additional Protection
All Quakers, four business owners, and seven farmers thought that enough land in the
Monteverde area was already protected, although one Quaker and one business owner who said
yes mentioned the need for corridors to link the Monteverde reserves to other areas. Although
they thought that enough land had been conserved, many of them expressed pride in the fact that
so much land in the area was protected, talking about how much more land in Monteverde is
protected than in other areas, as well as how much more land is forested and conserved now than
it was in past generations. Of the nine people in these three groups who thought that more land in
Monteverde should be protected, four business owners and one farmer thought that the
government should take responsibility for protecting it, and two farmers and two business
owners thought it should be "everyone's responsibility," although they could not clarify what
they meant (Table 3.2). Although all of the reserved land in Monteverde is privately owned, no
one in these groups mentioned that conservation organizations should take responsibility for
conserving more land.
Biologists were a different story. None thought that enough land in Monteverde was
protected, and instead of answering vaguely that "more" should be conserved, each had definite
ideas about what should be protected. The Pacific slope and wildlife corridors were mentioned
more than once; elevational gradients and specific forest types were cited as well. In addition,
seven expressed additional conservation as a necessity rather than something that simply should
be done. Four thought that this expansion of protected area should be the responsibility of the
local or national government, while the other six thought that individuals or conservation
organizations should shoulder the load (Table 3 .2). One pointed out that although in the past
conservation has been the work of biologists and conservation organizations, now the local

68

government should have the responsibility to fulfill conservation goals after biologists point out
the need.

Perceived Problems
The environmental problems perceived to be most immediately important in Monteverde varied
little between groups. The most commonly cited problems included, in order of frequency,
progress and unplanned development, water issues (pollution, disputes) and waste management
(Table 3.3). Although the vast majority of people in all groups noted one or more of these
dilemmas, other problems were occasionally mentioned. Interestingly, only one farmer and one
hotel owner brought up chemical use on farms as a problem; the rest of the farmers mentioned
chemicals neither as a problem nor as an issue related to conservation, and they discussed their
chemical use only when directly asked about it. Three biologists talked about global warming as
a major problem, although they also mentioned that it has no local solutions. One business
owner expressed his opinion that there were not enough tourists visiting the area.
When discussing the three dominant problems, respondents either had no solution
suggestions or thought that the local government should deal with them. Although they often
suggested that individuals could do their part by decreasing consumption and waste production
or treating their water instead of simply dumping it in the river, these recommendations were
most frequently couched in the opinion that the government had the ultimate responsibility.
Most talked about things that "people" should do. When questioned about the identity of these
"people," respondents implicated other business owners, farmers, or inhabitants of Monteverde.
Although the problems that the biologists discussed were largely the same as the
problems cited by other groups, their perspective was different. As in other groups, they noted
crowding, lack of planning, and water problems; however, unlike other shareholders, eight either

69

directly or indirectly implicated tourism as the ultimate cause of the majority of environmental
problems in the area.

DISCUSSION
These data lead to a variety of conclusions on both a local and a global level. Definitions of
conservation, perceived problems, and views on future conservation efforts in Monteverde
differed depending on shareholder grouping. The data as well as the differences between groups
suggest possible solutions to community problems, the probable future of conservation in the
Monteverde area, and overall conclusions about the history, success, and duplicability of
conservation in Monteverde.

Possible Solutions to Community Problems
Although the mentality of solving problems locally persists in Monteverde, a committee of
people cannot force their neighbors to comply with local laws. Respondents' repetitive
recommendations for what "people" should do suggest that many local residents see clearly what
should be done in the community, but they are unable to enforce compliance. The situation
speaks of the need for a strong local government to respect laws and provide leadership in
planning, one capable of both creating laws and enforcing them. This government would be
capable of implementing zoning laws, which would be nearly impossible for a committee to
enforce, but which were highlighted by many of the community shareholders as an immediate
necessity due to the unbridled growth of tourism. Local government could initiate more
effective waste management techniques, hopefully both reducing waste production and dealing
better with its disposal.
However, as the biologists realized, the problems that Monteverde is experiencing are
symptomatic of a community that has grown too large for its own health, and the ultimate cause

70

is tourism. Without the recent population explosion and development associated with tourism,
these issues would have remained on a small enough scale to avoid many current environmental
problems. As several people noted, the ultimate answer may be to limit, or at least to plan more
effectively, tourism and its associated development. In addition, education oflocal people could
successfully encourage them to minimize their own contributions to local environmental
problems. Tourists, and ecotourists especially, do not want to see dirty streets, polluted rivers,
and overcrowded development. Realization of this characteristic of tourists could convince local
people both to decrease their share in these problems as well as to demand that local politicians
or ecotouristic businesses enforce laws preventing them.
The Future of Conservation in Monteverde

Although data related to protection show strong local pride in and support for keeping already
conserved land protected, they also show that it is the biologists and, to a lesser extent, the
business owners who primarily want to protect more land. However, in the case of the business
owners, this wish is probably tied to tourism. This assumption is supported by the fact that the
owners' definitions of conservation were generally large-scale and vague with few ties to local
ecosystems, suggesting a lack of personal connection to the environment in Monteverde. On the
other hand, 50% of owners mentioned tourism in their definitions.
In contrast, biologists seem to have purely scientific and utilitarian bases for expressing
the desire to see more land protected. This is supported by the specificity of their responses to
the question of more protection, the fact that 70% discussed conservation as a necessity, and the
fact that 70% mentioned biodiversity and 90% mentioned ecosystem functioning in their
definitions of conservation. Given these views, their history of activism, and the general lack of
concern for additional conservation among other shareholders, it will most probably be biologists,

71

perhaps with some support from business owners, fighting for the expansion of protected land.
Despite the opinion of many that it should be "everyone's responsibility," the historical trend of
biologists and conservation organizations protecting land will likely prove to be the future
pattern as well.

Conclusions
Overall, results show that ecotourism is certainly not a panacea for local problems, as it is
sometimes assumed to be in other places, where scientists introduce ecotourism as the sole basis
of conservation (Infield 200 I). Although ecotourism does increase the income of a community,
it has its own set of associated problems. Though some hotel owners and a few of the Quakers
saw tourism as a help to the environment, many others, including most of the biologists and one
Quaker, saw tourism as damaging to the ecosystems that it touches.
Indeed, one conclusion that can be drawn from the data in this study is that ecotourism
was neither a primary nor even a secondary impetus for conservation in Monteverde; rather, it is
simply a recent addendum to the economic basis of the community, taking advantage of
conservation programs already in place. Although local business owners become more aware of
conservation for economic reasons, positive effects of ecotourism on the local population's
activism in protecting the environment have yet to be demonstrated. Excluding the biologists,
most respondents are content with the amount of protected land in Monteverde now, and the
majority of those that are not are content to sit back and let the government address the issue.
Rather, as a few community members perceived, it seems to have been the presence of
the Quakers, with their foreign ideas about water and soil conservation, and the biologists, with
their extensive knowledge base and propensity for environmental activism, that began
conservation in Monteverde. The presence of these individuals led to the formation of the first

72

reserves, which led to the involvement of national and international conservation organizations
as well as the foundation of local organizations such as the MCL. Only much later did these
efforts secondarily lead to the development of ecotourism.
Moreover, Monteverde is characterized by being extremely accepting of foreign
influence. The Quakers have been community members longer than many inhabitants; American
biologists are neighbors, longtime residents, and members of the MCL, and a significant
proportion ofresidents and business owners are foreign. Farmers proudly talk about their
reforestation efforts and windbreaks while forgiving their forebears for their ignorance in
deforesting the region, though few can explain just where their knowledge came from and just
why their parents changed their minds about cutting down trees. Foreign ideas about
conservation have been around so long that they have been assimilated by the local population
and simply incorporated into daily life, and people have almost completely forgotten that these
ideas were originally supplied by the Quakers, the biologists, and the MCL.
In summary, these data suggest that it is not a single factor like ecotourism that
contributes to conservation in the area. More accurately, a complex matrix of historical,
ideological, and cultural factors unique to this region in particular created Monteverde as it is
today. Unfortunately, using Monteverde as a model for conservation requires the realization that
it is unique in many ways and that duplicating the series of people and events that made
conservation possible there would be nearly impossible in another place and time.
However, this is not to say that either ecotourism-based or scientifically-based
conservation is impossible in other places. The exact events and conditions in Monteverde do
not necessarily have to be replicated to create a successful conservation program. In addition,
certain core factors intrinsic to the success of Monteverde may or may not be duplicable in other

73

areas. One of the most important of these factors is a devoted collection of locally-based
biologists; another is a population with a history of self-sufficiency and openness to new ideas
and viewpoints. Also, as suggested by Burlingame (2000) but not shown by this study, the lack
oflarge-scale poverty among the original subsistence farmers in the region allowed
conservation-minded people and organizations to focus on conservation rather than a campaign
to improve the inhabitants' quality of life. Overall, the primarily scientific and ideological, rather
than economic, basis of conservation with the secondary development of ecotourism is probably
key to the success of both.
Although they perpetuated the deforestation, the original local farmers were in fact being
hurt by it; however, many seem to have failed to realize this until foreign influences like the
Quakers and the biologists came and pointed it out. Given this observation, conservationists in
other areas could benefit from examining the effects of habitat loss on local people.
Alternatively, as Mark Infield (200 I) suggests, promoting conservation in the context of the local
culture and values could provide a more convincing argument than economics in some areas. In
a way this also plays a part in the case of Monteverde. 40% of Quakers, 50% of farmers, 20% of
business owners and 50% of biologists expressed the belief that nature should be conserved
because it is beautiful, tranquil, and contributes to good health, demonstrating inherent values
consistent with conservationist ideas.

ANALYSIS
From this study, unlike the others, we can learn about relationships mainly from success stories
rather than failures. Monteverde and its reserve complex are remarkable in many ways, and
there are many factors separating it from the other case studies. First of all, the reserves in the
area are private and there is little governmental input in their fate, an unusual feature unique to

74

Monteverde among the cases presented. Second, there were no real development projects in the
area - inhabitants started off in passable socioeconomic condition, and development proceeded
on its own, largely as a result of reserve establishment and the subsequent emergence of an
ecotourism industry. However, the problems associated with this development are echoed in
many other areas; I have heard similar complaints of sprawling development without effective
zoning or waste management from people as diverse as cab drivers in rural Mexico to real estate
agents in Southern California. These issues, though, are not as problematic at the other locations
discussed in this paper, where development has yet to reach a stage where planning becomes an
ISSUe.

Also, unlike the regions in the other case studies, much of the deforestation in the
Monteverde area happened at the hand of subsistence farmers long before conservationists
stepped in. As a result the programs implemented there have been more or less equally divided
between preserving the remaining habitat and reforesting that which was lost. The fact that
deforestation was not always in the best interests of local farmers is also significant: this
information emerged from systematic study only after reforestation efforts had improved
productivity on farms, suggesting that similarly unforeseen positive results of reforestation could
be realized in other areas as well.
Additionally unusual is the fact that the hand of big, international ENGO's is rarely seen,
with the exception of monetarily during the establishment of the MCFP. In fact, there is little
interaction between even national or local ENGO's and community members: although the MCL
and the TSC alike have implemented environmental education programs as well as conservation
projects, the infonnation contained in these programs has, in the long run, been either
disregarded or assimilated by the community without so much as a hiccough of dissent. In 3 5

75

substantial discourses on conservation, only a handful of people mentioned the MCL, none
mentioned the TSC, and only biologists thought that conservation organizations would play a
role in future environmental preservation in the area. Yet farmers spout conservationist ideas
about forests, water and animals as though they've had them all their lives, when in reality their
fathers and grandfathers knew little about their environment but how to cut down trees, grow
crops, raise livestock, and hunt wild game. The difference between Monteverde and the other
two areas described in this paper, as it emerges from this study, is this: conservation is not a
foreign idea brought in recently by large-scale, paternalistic ENGO's. Rather, it has been a
constant presence since the coming of the Quakers, and especially since a number of biologists
took up permanent residence in the area. Conservationists are not people who pop in and out
unpredictably and dictate how they think things should be, half-heartedly proposing and
implementing projects that sometimes succeed and sometimes fail; they are neighbors and
friends, community members and local activists dedicated to making their views and knowledge
known and preserving the natural beauty of their home. Although some of the conflicts
described in Part II are evident in Monteverde, most of them are between local biologists and
local business owners rather than ENGO's and community residents at large, and few of these
disagreements have escalated to point that wedges are driven between ideologically distinct
groups.

PART IV: DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
By evaluating these examples as well as the historical patterns in local-ENGO relationships, we
can come to a number of conclusions about how those relationships could be improved. Few of
these improvements are restricted to the ground level of the field representative-local population

76

relationship, however; rather, enhancements can be made at every stage from field
implementation to organizational structure.

Implementation
At the level of implementation, for example, these studies make amply clear that [a great deal of!
communication is necessary to make projects successful; knowledge must be shared not only
from conservationists to local people, but also from locals to conservationists. This exchange,
however, is not the single element that will create successful conservation programs. Rather, the
two groups must establish an open relationship that invites discussion and provides a forum for
airing discrepancies and misunderstandings. Field representatives or project planners could
develop this relationship by approaching local people with respect, requesting the assistance of
qualified local inhabitants in conservationist activities that would employ their skills, and
soliciting friendships beyond the merely professional. As difficult as it may be for some
biologists and conservationists to change an inherent belief that humans are damaging to their
environment, in order to successfully affect change in the long run they must entertain the idea
that local and indigenous people could have valuable knowledge that must not be overlooked or
dismissed.
Additionally, field representatives should state clearly while outlining a project to a local
or indigenous population exactly what community members will receive in the course of
implementation, thus avoiding problems of misinterpretation and the perception of broken
promises when inhabitants do not receive what they expected. A proposed time frame would be
beneficial: one recurring problem was that of field representatives failing to return after a certain
interlude. Ideally this should be rectified by those individuals visiting regularly to address any
problems, but in reality for financial reasons this is frequently impossible. Rather than being

77

surprised and disillusioned when this happens, locals should be apprised of the amount of time
that representatives will be able to return to a community, when they will cease to do so and also
the reasons why they are obligated to withdraw their help.

Project Planning
Only a portion of the effectiveness of conservation programs can be addressed solely between
local people and field representatives, however. Long before fieldworkers are mired in the
problems of actually executing projects, ENGO's could take measures to ensure those projects'
success. The planning process could in many cases be made more efficient at several stages.
The main overarching improvement that needs to be made involves the acquisition of
more information at the outset of project planning. What is the local economic structure like?
What concept does the local population have of conservation? What interplay of cultural,
religious, financial and other reasons account for their resource use or overuse? What kind of
impact do their land use practices have on the local ecosystem? What kinds of conservation and
development programs have been attempted in this community in the past? Asking these
questions at the beginning of local conservationist work would have benefited both the FMB in
Hill's study and the various ENGO's active in the Calakrnul region in Cahn von Seelen's study.
In Monteverde, answering them contributed to successful reforestation initiatives in the area.
One way to obtain this information would be to involve inhabitants of the community in some
stage of project planning. Anthropologists stress the need to use inherent social, economic, and
ideological structures as the basis for conservation programs: bringing those structures to the
planning table could incorporate them that much more easily. Regardless of how an organization
acquires information about the local people in question, their social and economic norms, the

78

ecological impact of their community and their views on conservation, with it project planners
will be much more able to develop successful projects.
This information could also aid the individuals planning a conservation program by
indicating the type of people best suited to addressing the issues at hand. Are the land use
practices on which the program focuses the traditional occupation of men or women? Does the
situation call for someone with a background in ecology? Biology? Anthropology? Economics?
Problem solving? All of these are beneficial, but depending on the project one or two could be
more useful than the others.
Organizational Structure and Functioning

Despite modifications at the planning and implementation levels that could boost a program's
probability of success, problems with developing and keeping local trust, effective preparation,
and communication are often more deeply rooted. These recurring difficulties speak to
inefficiencies within the organizations themselves, and many of these ENGO's would benefit
from an internal evaluation.
Why, for example, is communication within organizations so often less than ideal? Why
do field representatives and the higher executives that approve their finances frequently fail to
connect, resulting in broken promises and insufficient resources? Why are the regulations
enforced in the Mbaracayu Nature Reserve so irregular? Essentially, where is the kink in the
bureaucratic hose where information stops like so much water? To develop trust among their
local associates, field representatives cannot make promises that never come to fruition; more
effective communication within the organization would prevent problems like this from arising.
In addition, ENGO's as well as the local populations with which they work could benefit
from streamlining implementation. Are there consistent problem areas? What conflicts arise

79

periodically? How are these conflicts affected by the organization itself, at higher levels than
field representatives? This query could be addressed by a trained consultant, but it would be far
easier for conservation organizations to simply conduct self-evaluations. TNC, with Traditional
Peoples and Biodiversity Conservation in Large Tropical Landscapes, admirably addressed this

issue with the help of social scientists, anthropologists, and local liaisons. However, the majority
ofENGO's, and presumably those with fewer human and financial resources at their disposal in
particular, never go to the trouble of determining how and why their projects succeed or fail, to
which the dearth ofliterature on the subject attests. Even without the ability to hire consultants
or social scientists, though, ENGO's could make a practice of project evaluation, even to so
simple an extent as a survey filled out by project implementers and evaluated to determine
commonalities, problems and possible solutions. No doubt some organizations already employ
measures of this kind; but the constant recurrence of conflicts and issues as simple as failures in
communication suggest that even if such a system is in place, it fails to effectively address
problems in implementation.
It does not help matters that ENGO's, especially those that are larger and more powerful,

are often in competition for funds and projects (Chapin 2004). Although they do collaborate on
some ventures, this competition creates a barrier to ENGO's viewing each other as useful
resources. Together with self-evaluation, inter-organizational communication about successes
and failures could benefit all involved parties.
Finally, each organization should determine its opinion on several ethical concerns raised
by the potential future of conservation. The stance that an organization takes on these issues has
important implications for the types of projects they will undertake and how they will execute

80

them. These concerns are raised in questions asked by local populations as well as the global
community at large, and ENGO's should be prepared to address them as well as they can.
1. Is the "people-free park" approach to conservation ethically tenable, if it contributes
to or does not improve a low quality of life among local people? Is this even an
ENGO's concern?
2. Cahn von Seelen noted the questions of subsistence farmers in Mexico as to why they
should change their entire way of life to combat global problems. Why should these
individuals be obligated to make sacrifices and compromises to correct problems like
global warming for which developed nations are the most responsible?
3. Must programs always be economically beneficial to a community, and should
ENGO's go so far as to directly provide economic incentives for conservation?
The decisions ofENGO's on how to incorporate these issues as well as others into their
missions will determine the fate of conservation in the future.
Conclusion

Essentially, conservation as a worldwide enterprise would benefit from changes in structure and
operation. In many ways conservation is moving toward a new regime: one that incorporates
social well-being, sustainable development, and increasing interactions with industry. For
example, the biggest, most powerful NGO's are beginning to occupy slightly different roles than
they have had for most of their history; increasingly, organizations like WWF, CI and TNC are
relaxing their raptor-like surveillance of industry and instead entering into corporate partnerships
(Esty and Winston 2006). Ideally these partnerships, which involve various levels of intensity
and interaction, are beneficial to both parties and the environment as well (Rondinelli and
London 2002). The lowest level of interaction intensity between ENGO's and corporations is

81

that of monetary support for the ENGO; at the highest level of intensity, the ideal point for
ENGO's, organizations and corporations collaborate to create new and better environmental
management strategies for businesses (Rondinelli and London 2002). Many critics decry what
they believe to be partnerships between fundamentally opposing groups, and some voices accuse
these organizations of straying from their original purpose (Chapin 2004). These critics fail to
realize, however, that this is a niche that needs to be filled, and it must simply fall to other
ENGO's to shift into occupying the larger organizations' former position. While subsistence
farmers and indigenous communities may perpetuate harmful practices like illegal logging,
intensive hunting and agriculture and overconsumption of scarce resources, industry causes
pollution and environmental destruction on a global scale, and one important way to address this
impact effectively is to open venues for frank discussion, sharing of knowledge, and reciprocal
benefit. Businesses and conservationists, like local populations and conservationists, have a
great deal to offer one another, and collaboration of this nature is a necessary step in
environmental protection.
Diversifying in this way, in addition to tackling broad, worldwide issues like global
hotspots and social and economic improvement, leaves these powerful organizations with lofty
goals but a plethora of field-level problems, including and exceeding all those discussed in Parts
II and III. One way that large, international ENGO's could address these comparative minutiae
would be to establish or help to develop satellite organizations, as TNC aided in the development
of the FMB and WWF helped the MCL. By establishing even small satellite organizations to
administer small regions, for example, ENGO's could establish the local presence so urged by
anthropologists while simultaneously micromanaging conservation goals. Operating in this way
has made the MCL successful: by acting locally and adopting small-scale goals such as

82

preserving habitat for local wildlife, this organization and its conservationist agenda has been
assimilated into the community.
Of course, this strategy is not financially or organizationally feasible in most cases, but
alternative methods for addressing recurring field-level problems do exist. At the most
fundamental level, for example, the evidence from the case studies presented here as well as
others supports the conclusion that conservation organizations should implement fewer projects
with much more effectiveness. Every failed program, every Ache pig that dies because no one
would feed it, every hour that Delia spends trekking through La Guadalupe making promises that
bad communication or financial mistakes do not allow her to keep is a waste of time, money, and
resources. It took ten years of trial and error for ProNatura-Peninsula de Yucatan to discover the
simple secrets to successful projects, and after almost that much time the FMB was still making
errors fatal to its nascent conservation programs.
A novel tactic for ENGO's to ameliorate these difficulties and increase efficiency would
be to commission at least two - one man, one woman - ecological anthropologists to simply live
for a time in every community in which the organization hopes to implement a large-scale or
long-term project. Ideally this preparatory step should be taken before every new enterprise, but
this may not be financially feasible.
This method would alleviate the vast majority of conflicts that arise between conservation
organizations and local people. By living in a community for a year, for example, field
representatives would ideally develop the relationships that every case study deemed so
necessary. These direct and established relationships, like Hill's with the Ache, would create
open forums for discussion and learning in both parties. In this way the very presence of these
individuals could result in a community-wide dissemination of information and ideas about

83

biology, ecology, biodiversity, and conservation, much as the similar presence of biologists and
Quakers has impacted Monteverde. With training in anthropology and ethnography,
representatives could examine essential cultural elements like definitions and conceptions of
conservation, community history, cultural norms, religion and folklore to create a multi-faceted
assessment of potential environmental management strategies. Moreover, with backgrounds in
biology and ecology, they would understand the pressures on and needs of the local ecosystem,
avoiding simplistic mistakes akin to that cited by Hill involving the unfounded prohibition on
hunting of locally abundant organisms. It would also be essential for these individuals to have a
basic knowledge of economic principles, granting them the capability to accurately diagnose and
address such issues as the Tragedy of the Commons and the free-rider problem.
Although this may seem to be an unnecessary investment of time, money, and human
resources, in the long run such a step would provide ENGO's with the information and
relationships necessary to implement successful conservation programs, saving countless years
and dollars on strategies that may or may not achieve their goals.
In the end, a variety of adjustments and new tactics on every level of conservation
infrastructure have the potential to improve conservation implementation by further developing
the relationships between ENGO's and the local communities with which they work. However,
as in all quests for self-improvement, the first step will be for conservation organizations to
realize the problems inherent in their current operational strategies and make a commitment to
changing them. If these organizations are willing to keep an open mind, evaluate themselves
critically, and entertain the possibility of tackling conservation from an entirely new angle, there
remains hope that new and ambitious goals of environmental preservation can be met. With

84

dedication, communication and understanding, a new regime of conservation will carry us into a
bright - and forested - future.

REFERENCES CITED
Acheson, James M. 2006. "Institutional Failure in Resource Management." Annual Review of
Anthropology 35: 117-134.
Agrawal, Arun and Clark C. Gibson 1999. "Enchantment and Disenchantment: The Role of
Community in Natural Resource Conservation." World Development 27(4):629-649.
Alcorn, Janis B. 1993. "Indigenous People and Conservation." Conservation Biology 7(2): 424426.
Balee, William 2006. "The Research Program of Historical Ecology." Annual Review of
Anthropology 35:75-98.
Brown, Katrina and Sergio Rosendo 2000. "The Institutional Architecture of Extractive Reserves
in Rond6nia, Brazil." The Geographical Journal 166(1):35-48.
Burlingame, Leslie J. 2000. "Conservation in the Monteverde Zone." IN: Nalini M. Nadkarni
and Nathaniel T. Wheelwright 2000 (ed). Monteverde: Ecology and Conservation of a Tropical
Cloud Forest. Oxford University Press, New York.
BorgerhoffMulder, Monique and Peter Coppolillo 2005. Conservation: Linking Ecology,
Economics, and Culture. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
Cahn von Seelen, Kristin 2004. " 'This Place Was Paradise': Consumption as Metaphor and
Material Concern on Mexico's Southern Frontier." Doctoral Dissertation, Department of
Anthropology, University of Pennsylvania.
Chapeski, Andrew 1995. "Land, Landscape, Culturescape: Aboriginal Relationships to Land and
the Co-Management of Natural Resources, Ottowa: Report to the Royal Commission on
Aboriginal Peoples."
Chapin, Mac 2004. "A Challenge to Conservationists." World Watch November/December 2004:
17-31.
Conservation International Annual Report 2004.
Dove, Michael R. 2006. "Indigenous People and Environmental Politics." Annual Review of
Anthropology 35: 191-208.

85

Esty, D.C. and A.S. Winston 2006. Green to Gold. Yale University Press: New Haven,
Connecticut.
Fairhead, J. and M. Leach 1996. Misreading the African Landscape: Society and Ecology in
Forest-Savanna Mosaic. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England.
Fang, Yiping 2002. "Ecotourisrn in Western Sichuan, China." Mountain Research and Development
22: 113-115.
GoVisitCostaRica 2007. http://www.govisitcostarica.com/default.asp. 17 April 2007.
Haber, William 2005. "Dragonflies and Damselflies: Odonata of Monteverde, Costa Rica."
Electronic Field Guide Project, University of Massachusetts-Boston.
http://efg.cs.urnb.edu/rnonteverde/Ode/OdeMap.htrnl. 17 April 2007.
Hardin, Garrett 1968. "The Tragedy of the Commons." Science 162: 1243-1248.
Hill, Kirn 1996. "The Mbaracayu reserve and the Ache of Paraguay. IN: Kent H. Redford and
Jane A. Mansour 1996 (ed). Traditional Peoples and Biodiversity Conservation in Large
Tropical Landscapes. The Nature Conservancy, America Verde Publications, Virginia.
Holt, Flora Lu 2005. "The Catch-22 of Conservation: Indigenous Peoples, Biologists, and
Cultural Change." Human Ecology 33(2):199-215.
Hunter, Malcolm L., Jr. 2002. Fundamentals a/Conservation Biology. Blackwell Publishing,
Willison, Vermont.
Infield, Mark 2001. "Cultural Values: A Forgotten Strategy for Building Community Support for
Protected Areas in Africa." Conservation Biology 15(3): 800-802.
Jacobson, S.K. and M.D. McDuff 1998. "Training idiot savants: the lack of human dimensions in
conservation biology." Conservation Biology 12(2): 263-267.
Janzen, Daniel 1998. "Gardenification ofwildland nature and the human footprint." Science
279:1312-1314.
Johnston, Alison M. 2006. Is the Sacred/or Sale? Earthscan, London.
Noss, R.F. 1990. "Indicators for monitoring biodiversity: A hierarchical approach." Conservation
Biology 4: 355-364.
Read, Adam D. 1999. "'A weekly doorstep recycling collection, I had no idea we could!'
Overcoming the local barriers to participation." Resources, Conservation and Recycling 26:217249.
Redford, Kent H. 1991. "The ecologically noble savage." Cultural Survival Quarterly 15: 46-48.

86

Redford, Kent H. 1996. "Getting to Conservation." IN: Redford, Kent H. and Jane A. Mansour
1996 (ed). Traditional Peoples and Biodiversity Conservation in Large Tropical Landscapes.
The Nature Conservancy, America Verde Publications, Virginia.
Redford, Kent H. and Jane A. Mansour 1996 (ed). Traditional Peoples and Biodiversity
Conservation in Large Tropical Landscapes. The Nature Conservancy, America Verde
Publications, Virginia.
Redford, Kent H. and Allyn M. Stearman 1993. "Forest-Dwelling Native Amazonians and the
Conservation of Biodiversity: Interests in Common or Collision?" Conservation Biology
7(2):248-255.
Redford, Kent H. and Steven E. Sanderson 2000. "Extracting Humans from Nature."
Conservation Biology 14(5): 1362-1364.
Redman, Charles L. 1999. Human Impact on Ancient Environments. The University of Arizona
Press, Tucson.
Rondinelli, D.A. and T. London 2002. "Stakeholder and Corporate Responsibilities in Crosssectoral Environmental Collaborations: Building Value, Legitimacy and Trust." Washington,
D.C: Working Paper, Nonprofit Sector Research Fund, The Aspen Institute.
Salzman, James and Barton H. Thompson, Jr. 2007. Environmental Law and Policy. Foundation
Press, New York.
Schwartzman, Stephan, Adriana Moreira and Daniel Nepstad 2000. "Rethinking Tropical Forest
Conservation: Perils in Parks." Conservation Biology 14(5): 1351-1357.
Shafer, Craig L. 1990. Nature Reserves: Island Theory and Conservation Practice. Smithsonian
Institution Press, Washington, London.
Stearman, Allyn M. 1994. "Only slaves climb trees." Human Nature 5:339-357.
Struhsaker, Thomas T 1998. "A Biologist's Perspective on the Role of Sustainable Harvest in
Conservation." Conservation Biology 12(4): 930-932.
Terborgh, John. 2000. "The Fate of Tropical Forests: a Matter of Stewardship." Conservation
Biology 14(5):1358-1361.
Vitousek, Peter M., Harold A. Mooney, Jan Lubchenco and Jerry M. Melillo 1997. "Human
Domination of Earth's Ecosystems." Science 277: 494-499.
West, Paige, James Igoe, and Dan Brockington 2006. "People and Parks: The Social Impact of
Protected Areas." Annual Review of Anthropology 35:251-277.

87

Western, D. and Wright, Michael R. (eds.) 1994. Natural Connections: Perspectives in
Community-based Conservation. Island Press, Washington D.C.
Whole Foods 2003. "One Year After USDA Organic Standards Are Enacted More Americans
Are Consuming Organic Food." Electronic document,
http://www.wholefoods.com/company/pr_ I 0-14-03.html, accessed March 13, 2007.
Wilson, E.O. 1999. The Diversity of Life. W.W. Norton & Company, New York.
World Wide Fund for Nature Annual Report 2006.
Worldwatch Institute 2005. "From Readers: A Challenge to Conservationists: Phase IL" World
Watch January/February 2005: 5-20.

88

TABLES AND FIGURES

Sta.led
A1a1wgenwnt
Title~'
fa

lh

Stricr namre
reserve
\VildemeSs ttrea

II

National park

m

National monument

IV

H,ibimtfspeci<:s
management
-ar:ea

V

Protected landscape/seascape

!\'fanage111e11t

SR

W'P

SD

Science

,:,. ,:;- -;:;-

a:-,:;-

--~ -

Wi\deme,s protecnon
Ecosystem prorecnon and recreation
Conservation of
specific natural
feanJres
Conser. ation
through man-

*

* :::.-

>.'-:::.-

,.,

*"-~

'

Obiectil'e

-

,,

0

ES
::,;.

Obiectiue'-'

NF

:::,,:::, :::

-;:-

ED

SU

CA

,;,'.-

*<-

:::;,;;



"fR

','.

,;:-

* ,;- ;~

,:-.:-

1' ~.

,;;.- t- ,:,,.

;:Cf,.::;'..

:,,_c;.;.

'

,a;.,;.

.;;,,:,:,;:-

.,.*., *

*

,:;- ,:_~

;--:<-

~--

:::;.::;.

::::-:,.

=:,,-;:.,;;.

:.:: -::;-

;;;.,-,.

,;-;,:;-

'

a,.

4

""

agen11::nt inter-

venrion
Landscape/
seascape

1:.~*

: :- * -:;,

cd:ns.er1tarion

VI 1',,!an,\gcd resource
protected area

and recreation
Susrainable use of
namrnl ecosysterns

**

;'.-'i

*

~-



; ]UCN us,es six c::11:e-gnrie:; for das,ification of protected areas, -.1ecording ro rhe man:1.gemcnr obfc-.:--dn:-s of
rbi;; sires HLCKt 19941. Tht::;c- 1995 darn nrt taken from Green and l\1im.' 0997f, who also Jefino:d and scored

the managemem obje-cfr,.,fi.
Using dan.1 from Green ,rnd Paine. land use !s apponioncd in [he follmving order to 11 \mnirnul p,1rks~
4,01J0~605 knit Vl tmanaged n.:~uu:rct proten.cd ,1reas-., 3 1 601,44() km;\ IV \habirn.tlsptc!es rnanagemenr
are:.is,. 2.,459,i703 knr=-1. and V (protecred bndsc.;.1pefs-1::ascape~ 1~057~448 knY\ with Ia, lb. and HI aH having
!css. rh;,,:n a rnilllon km\
: SR: s-:iemific rest;_1r.:h~ \'fl\ ,sil<lc:Tn6s prmcnion: SD~ spt:....::ies.f:gentric dli:er:-.!ry: ES. environrnemal senices; Nf.
n,1rnr,1.Vculmral ft:.:1run.:~; TR~ rourisrn and recrearion; ED, education; SU 1 .5uSt-.jinablt m,e:: C:\. culmral :ttt"Jl!'mtt:~.
i ,;,:s-t- primary ob]cct-ivc: ,.:~ 5e,:ond,1ry objecriYe; -o::~ pt.itentfa.Hy no't applicab!e; -nor appi-ica:ble.

Table 1.1 Protected Area Management Categories (Borgerhoff and Coppolillo 2005 :31)

89

Shareholder
Quakers
Farmers
Business Owners
Biologists

Total

Biodiversity
0
0
0
7
7

Ecosystems
0
0
0
9
9

Water
3
4

6
0
13

Forests
0
10
3
0
13

Soil
2
3
0
0
5

Animals

0
5
4

The
Planet/The
Environment
0
1

8

0

0
9

9

Table 3.1. Number of people who mentioned specific elements in their definitions of
conservation. Columns represent concepts relating to conservation; numbers are the number of
people within each group citing that concept in their definitions of conservation.

Shareholder
Quakers
Farmers
Business Owners
Biologists

Total

Enough
Protected

More:
Government
Responsibility

More:
Individual
Responsibility

(n)

(n)

(n)

14.3 (5)
20 (7)
11.4(4)
0 (0)
45.7 (16)

0 (0)
2.9 (1)
11.4(4)
11.4(4)
25.7 (9)

0 (0)
5.7 (2)
5.7 (2)
11.4(4)
22.9 (8)

More: Conservation
Organization
Resvonsibilih, (n)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
11.4(4)
11.4 (4)

Table 3.2. Views on additional land protection in Monteverde .The n is the total number of
respondents who expressed a certain response. "More" signifies that respondents thought more
land should be protected. The percentage is the percentage of the total 35 people. Total
percentages do not add up to 100 because two biologists thought that both individuals and
conservation organizations had the responsibility of conserving more land.

Shareholder
Quakers
Farmers
Business Owners
Biologists

Total

Water
Issues
5.7 (2)
5. 7 (2)
17.1 (6)
14.3 (5)
42.9 (15)

Waste

Manaf!ernent
0 (0)
5.7 (2)
8.6 (3)
0 (0)
14.3 (5)

Progress/Unplanned
Develooment
2.9 (1)
14.3 (5)
11.4(4)
20.0 (7)
48.6 (17)

Chemical
Use
0 (0)
2.9 (1)
2.9 (1)
0 (0)
5. 7 (2)

Not
Enough
Tourists
0 (0)
0 (0)
2.9 (1)
0 (0)
2.9 (1)

Global
Warmimz

0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
8.6 (3)
8.6 (3)

None
5. 7 (2)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
5. 7 (2)

Table 3.3. Frequency of problem perceptions. Then represents the number of people in each
group who identified a certain problem as important in Monteverde. The percentage is the
percentage of the total 35 people.

90

,;( Country Map of

Costo Rica
~. .

..

~!l<,m, d,I c.k,rodo

Caribbean
Sea

\~tf11J:io Nacl<itlal
nt-del Colorado

PACIFIC
OCfAN

0

.,s

lO

IS

100

~ .

@Go\tlsi!Cl>,iaRl~uom

Figure 1. Map of Costa Rica, with the Monteverde area outlined in blue (GoVisitCostaRica
2007).

91

Figure 2. The dairy plant established by the Quakers continues to contribute to the income of
local farmers, many of whom still milk their cows by hand.

Figure 3. Farmers bring their milk in carts or on horseback to the main road in San Luis, where a
truck picks it up and transports it to the factory for processing.

92

Figure 4. Inside the Monteverde Cloud Forest Preserve

Figure 5. The San Luis Valley in Monteverde, where many subsistence farmers reside. Rows of
trees are used as windbreaks and erosion prevention around pastures and agricultural land.

93

Figure 6. Monteverde is famous for its coffee, which is grown by a local Fair Trade co-op. Here,
young coffee plants are cultivated near a greenhouse before planting.
CMtltiental
;_--~ bi,..ide

Contour line: 700 m

Nrooon


Odonata sites

Towns.shp
N_Roado
NRivers.ohp


, Reserves

. ,omaters

Figure 7. Map of the Monteverde Reserve Complex as well as the main surrounding towns,
rivers, and roads (Haber 2005). For abbreviations, see text.

94

Figure 8. Nancy Johnson and her daughter in front of their family's hotel, the La Colina Lodge.

Figure 9. Gilbert Lobo, local farmer living in the San Luis Valley.

95

Figure 10. Richard K. LaVal, local biologist and bat specialist.

96

APPENDICES
APPENDIX I

List of Interview Questions
What is your:
Full name?
Age?
Last year of school completed?
Profession?
Spouse's profession?
Number of children?

1. Where were you born?
2. How do you define conservation?
3. Do you think that conservation is a part of your life? Why or why not? What do you do to
conserve?
4. Why is it important to conserve?
5. Is enough land in Monteverde protected? Do you think that more should be protected?
Who do you think has the responsibility of protecting it?
6. Why do you have the profession that you have?
7. What do you think are Monteverde's biggest conservation-related problems? What do
you think are good ways to solve them?

97

APPENDIX II
List of Respondents by Group
Quakers
Mary Rockwell
Lucky Guindon
WolfGuindon
Marvin Rockwell
Howard Rockwell

Farmers
Climaco Castro
Gilbert Lobo
Francisco Vargas
Oldemar Salazar
Jorge Fuentes
JuanLeit6n
Rafael Leit6n
Mario Castro
Milton Brenes
Geovanny Leit6n
Business Owners (Business)
Nancy Jolmson (La Colina Lodge)
Adolfo Vargas Villalobos (Hotel Villa Verde)
Silvio Mengel (Farmacia Vitosi)
Pilar Aguvelo (Treehouse Hotel)
Galit Smilanski (Luna Azul)
Nir Smilanski (Moon Shiva)
Cindi Rodriguez (Paradise Cafe)
Paul Tiabenard (Hotel Montana)
Alexis Alfaro (Albergue Bellbird)
Frederico Valverde (La Tabema)
Biologists
Nalini Nadkarni
Jolm Longino
Kathy Winnet-Murray
Carmen Rojas
Carlos Guindon
Karen Masters
Alan Masters
Bill Haber
Willow Zuchowski
Richard LaVal

98

