Anthropology Senior Theses

University of Pennsylvania

ScholarlyCommons
Department of Anthropology

Spring 2007

Of Theatre: Its Production and Reception
Robert Caleb Green
University of Pennsylvania

Follow this and additional works at: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses

Q

Part of the Anthropology Commons

Recommended Citation
Green, Robert Caleb, "Of Theatre: Its Production and Reception" (2007). Anthropology Senior Theses.
Paper 90.

This paper is posted at ScholarlyCommons. https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/90
For more information, please contact repository@pobox.upenn.edu.

Of Theatre: Its Production and Reception
Disciplines
Anthropology

This thesis or dissertation is available at ScholarlyCommons: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/90

Of Theatre:
Its Production and Reception

Robert Caleb Green
Senior Thesis
May 2007
Dr. Asif Agha, Advisor
Department of Anthropology
University of Pennsylvania

ABSTRACT
This paper documents the artistic construction and spectatorial reception of a student
production of Paul Zindel's The Effect of Gamma Rays on Man-in-the-Moon Marigolds
at the University of Pennsylvania. The performance, which allowed audience members to
make suggestions that could subtly or radically alter the trajectory of the play at any point
during the performance, provides empirical data concerning the actor-audience coproduction of theatrical meaning. The paper focuses on three aspects of this theatrical
dialogue: the behavior of the student audience at the performance, the audience's
"spectatorial literacy" and the concomitant disparity between intended and actual
meaning, and the actors' ability to stay in character under audience-modifiable action.
Finally, an analysis of the actor-audience interactions leads the author to propose a new
ideational framework for the study of theatre, its nature and role in society.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This project could not have been possible without the generous help and guidance of
many people. Thank you to: iNtuitons Experimental Theatre Company, for their hard
work and commitment to a daunting and at times frnstrating project; the actors (Annie
Winter, Carly Daucher, Ilana Millner, Sydney Blum, and Paula Aranda), for their courage
and artistic devotion throughout the process; Laird Edge and Jenny Bimkrant, for their
spirited support and invaluable artistic contributions; Michael Sloan Warren, for his
enthusiasm and discernment in the play's production; Samantha Lazar, for her tireless
work-ethic and patience; and the crew of Gamma Rays, for their creativity and flexibility.
I would also like to thank my academic advisors for this project: Jennifer Higginbotham,
for her help with the creative development of the play, her theoretical contributions, and
her energetic support; Jolm Jackson Jr., for his willingness to take on this project, his
constructive criticism, and his help in establishing an ideological framework for the
paper; Marion Kant, to whom I owe so much, for her friendly, unfailing support, her
gnidance throughout the creation, execution and analysis of this project, her intellectual
criticism and stimulation, and her contagious academic ardor; and Asif Agha, my formal
advisor, for his critical eye, theoretical advice, and belief in this project from the
beginning.

In order for me to be a, to be a trne human being, / ... I
can't forever dwell in the idea, / of just identifying with
people like me and understanding me and mine.
Arma Deavere Smith
Twilight: Los Angeles, 1992 1

The matter of reception is, at best, extremely complex; at
worst, it is deadly.
Susan Bermel!
Theatre Audience.s,2

In the fall of 2006 at the University of Permsylvania, I directed a student
production of Paul Zindel' s Pulitzer Prize-wirming play The Effect of Gamma Rays on
Man-in-the-Moon Marigolds for iNtuitons Experimental Theatre Company. At this
performance of strict America realism, the mostly-student audience was encouraged to
proffer suggestions which could subtly or radically alter the trajectory of the play.
Additionally, they could make these suggestions at any point during the play's
performance.
Similar experiments, of course, have been done, but in contradistinction to the
work of someone like Augusto·Boal, the actors were not required to enact a spectator's
suggestion if they did not wish to. Instead, the actors were given the condition to accept
only suggestions they found "aesthetically competent." This power, to either accept or
reject the audience's suggestions, produced a uniquely multifarious dynamic between the
actor and audience in the co-production of theatrical meaning.
Objective study of theatre is a Herculean task to begin with. Barthes nicely
illustrates the art's inherent complexity when he writes, "At every point in a performance

you are receiving (at the same second) six or seven items of information (from the
scenery, the costuming, the lighting, the position of the actors, their gestures, their mode
of playing, their language), but some of these items remain fixed (this is true of the
scenery) while others change (speech, gestures)." 3
But this quote captures only part of theatre's complexity. As theatre practitioners
are eager to point it, it is the art's liveness which makes it truly unique as a story-telling
craft. As Richard Schechner puts it, "[T]he uniqueness of an event is not in its materiality
but in its interactivity." 4 What makes theatre fascinating as an art is the specific
interaction that occurs between actors and audience, the communicative circuit which is
initiated and results in the co-production of meaning. In other words, what makes theatre
both fascinating and problematic is the audience.
Unfortunately, very little is known about the audience. As de Marinis remarks,
"What the spectator actually does while attending a performance and what action, or kind
of action, the performance really carries out on the theatergoer are issues that have been
neglected and continue to be neglected. We know almost nothing about all of this, except
on an intuitive, prescientific basis." 5 The emergence of performance theory in the past
few decades has greatly increased our understanding of theatre, but the audience has been
sorely neglected, not for lack of trying, but because of the extreme difficulty of
monitoring or analyzing the spectatorial process.
At present, studies of the audience, when they do accomplish something
scientifically, focus on individual subjectivities. Almost nothing is known of how an
audience reads a performance as a group. Theorists have, of course, speculated. And their
speculations make sense on an intuitive level but lack the tenacity and rigor of true

empirical research. This experiment was my attempt to broach the "problem of the
audience."

Yet the question immediately arises, is the Gamma Rays audience still an
"audience" given the experiment's structure? Truthfully, the answer is no. But then, a
study of "The Audience" is impossible because of the unique dynamic of each
performance of each play. In other words, at this point in performance theory's research,
one can only discuss theatre ''audiences" or "a" theatre audience. One cannot discuss
"the" theatre audience. 6 Obviously, as the structure of the experiment itself automatically
rendered the Gamma Rays audience an unorthodox audience, one can only speak of the
observations of this audience. In this mam1er, one can arrive at empirical data which can
be analyzed and criticized, and from there, one can cautiously extrapolate to the
theoretical level of "the" audience. I will discuss my assumptions about the experiment
and how they colored the formation of its strncture below, but first, I must iterate the
experiment's respective goals.
There were three goals to this experiment: 1) To make manifest, through
relatively unstructured participation, an audience's actual behavior during a performance
in order that it might be documented and analyzed, 2) To measure an audience's
"spectatorial literacy" (its ability to read and evaluate a performance according to two
criteria, "readerly competence" and "aesthetic competence") in a spatially and
temporally-bound performance, as well as the ever-present gap between the semiotic
"model" and "actual" readers, 7 and 3) To test the actors' ability to maintain a consistent
action-being dynamic (i.e. character) under the duress of audience-modifiable action.

Furthermore, I wanted, with this experiment, to provide performance theory not
just with new ideas about the audience, but with performance data. As a result, and
because of the inherent complexity of such an academic venture, rigorous records were
maintained and ample data collected. The following is a list of various materials and data
from the experiment:
•

Actors' journals, kept throughout the rehearsal process, documenting their
experiences and respective orientations to their characters (Appendix E)

•

Rehearsal reports detailing each day's activities (Appendix C)

•

One fully transcribed rehearsal (Appendix D)

•

Video footage of the first, improvised run-through of the play by the actors,
displaying their understanding of the dramatic work two-weeks into the rehearsal
process

•

Video footage of the last dress rehearsal (the "baseline") documenting the show
"as rehearsed"

•

Video footage of all four performances of the play

•

Video footage of the audience at all four performances as captured by two hidden
cameras in night-vision (stage left and stage right, respectively)

•

Paper transcripts of each performance's audience suggestions (Appendix G)

•

Surveys completed by willing spectators after each performance (Appendix H)

•

Video footage of two sets of individual interviews and two groups interviews with
the cast of Gamma Rays, all conducted post-perfonnance or later

•

Copies of all advertisements, documents, and other materials pertaining to the
iNtuitons production (Appendix J)

As I mentioned briefly at the beginning of this essay, Gamma Rays is an
American realism play. Discussion of the reason for the play' s selection will come later,
but my reason in selecting the genre is worth addressing now: the style ofrealistic theatre
excludes audience intervention. 8 A wide selection of plays are available for production
which actively involve the audience, from experimental and envirornnental works from
the l 960's to dinner theatre murder mystery plays. Yet these plays are strnctured around
audience participation. For example, typically with an experimental play, only portions of
the dramatic text are written down, with the rest improvised by the actors. Murder
mystery plays, too, provide "open sections" for audience inclusion. In both these cases,
the text allows for audience participation, and then continues with scripted dialogue.
While research has been conducted using such plays, the strncture of these dramatical
works does not permit one to ask the questions which I sought to address. To put it
succinctly, we know what an audience does when called upon to participate in plays
written to include audience participation, but we do not know anything about the

perceptual operations taking place in realistic theatre. Gamma Rays attempted, then, to
conflate these models, to ask an audience to participate in an "un-participatory" drama, in
the hope of learning something about the audience's perceptions of both genres.
The question then becomes how to coerce an audience to betray their respective
observations about a performance without making them aware that they are doing just
that, which would compromise the data. In the end, a loose strncture revolving around a
false premise seemed the best answer. The audience was encouraged, again, to make
suggestions to the actors which could alter the play and its performance. Though far from
ideal, this strncture would inversely inform the researcher of perceptual operations as

they occurred. To use a simple example, if a spectator made a suggestion addressing the
actor by name, rather than by the character's name, one could deduce that the spectator
was not "willingly suspending disbelief'; she was aware of the fictional artifice and
remained outside of it
Yet this structure would also invariably make the actors the audience's "puppets,"
which was ethically questionable. After further consideration, the choice was made to
allow the actors to selectively enact the audience's suggestions. This seemed a perfect
opportunity to engage the actors and audience in a unique theatrical dialogue regarding
the production of meaning. They would literally be constructing the play' s meaning
audibly. Then it would simply be a matter of somehow recording the data and watching
what happened. The results were simultaneously fascinating and perfectly obvious.

In the end, each performance (there were four, all documented) possessed a
singular character Yet, interestingly, in every case the audience ultimately rejected the
experiment and the performance. On the other side of the fourth wall, the actors rebelled
against the audience. In subsequent interviews, they described the experience as a "war,"
that they were fighting, a battle to "win over" the unruly student-audience. Part of the
conflict originated in the theatrical style itself: steeped in the American tradition of
Method acting, the actors sought to create "identifiable" characters, a goal which carried
with it a specific relationship to the audience. When this relationship presented problems
to the actors, as a result of the experiment's structure itsel±~ but more importantly the
conduct of the audience, the actors became frustrated and artistically rebelled against the

audience. This generated an intensely insular sense of "communitas" between the actors,
and directly influenced their respective processes of acting. 9
In a way, the choice of the dramatic text and the nature of the experiment opposed
one another. Yet this is also what made the experiment so exciting. Again, realism, as a
geme, demands silence from an audience. It attempts to erect an enveloping artifice, a
flawless illusion that overtakes the audience to the point where they feel exactly what the
characters feel. In order for this to be accomplished, the audience must forget itself, must
neglect its social actuality, in order that each individual spectator may personally engage
with the characters. Surprisingly, though, this aesthetic tradition differentiates the West
from other theatrical traditions. As Richard Schechner points out, "Our culture is almost
alone in demanding uniform behavior from audiences while clearly segregating audience
_,,
,,10
fr om pe11ormers ...
Of course, all of this is mere convention. Only certain behaviors are reprimanded
in realistic theatre. For instance, one may cough, sneeze, or the like, without provoking
too much disruption. One practice, above all, testifies to the conventionality of realistic
theatre and the circumstances under which it, as a genre, is consistently violated: "When
a group of live actors delivers a fast-paced comic dialog to a receptive audience, we
expect them to wait until the laughter has died down before beginning the next round of
verbal one-upmanship." 11 In other words, realistic theatre strives to eradicate audience
self-awareness, but this is impossible. Instead, Western-realism audiences have learned to
ignore certain actions which disrupt the "silent" aesthetic. As Keir Elam points out, these
interruptions are cognized, but they are relegated to an alternate level of action. 12

The Gamma Rays experiment sought to test the boundaries of realistic
convention. The experiment would invariably dismpt the aesthetic of realism.
Consequently, would the audience successfully adopt new aesthetic "codes" in the
construction of meaning? Or would they cling to realistic convention and reject the
experiment's disintegration of the aesthetic? How long could the experiment and the
realistic aesthetic both operate on the performance? What type of performance would
such a union produce? Finally, what type of audience would such a union produce?
Before progressing, it is worth calling attention to two facets of the experiment
and its analysis. First, the experiment, again, was conducted at the University of
Pennsylvania. Thus, the vast majority of the audience was comprised of students. This
study specifically examines the behavior of student spectators at a student performance.
As the study shows, the results of the experiment can only be understood within this
framework. For instance, because of the self-supporting nature of student theatre at Penn,
many of the spectators were socially acquainted with the performers and technicians. As
one would expect, this social composition of the audience, and the concomitant actoraudience dynamic, greatly influenced the results of the experiment. Thus, a thorough
ethnographic analysis is vital in correctly interpreting the experiment's data.
The second facet of the experiment which deserves remark regards my position in
the construction and analysis of the experiment. This position could most adequately be
defined as that of participant ethnographer: I directed the play, and I interpreted the
findings. Accordingly, a certain degree of reflexivity is not only essential to the
presentation of my data, but ethical as well.

The manifest complexity of this project dictates a thorough explanation of the
experiment's goals and methodology. A chronological stmcture, it seems to me, is most
suitable to engage with the data as the experiment itself began humbly enough, but
gradually grew to incorporate more and more questions and ideas. Thus, I will begin with
a discussion of the experiment itself. Next, I will review the context of the perfonnancc,
describing the University of Pennsylvania's artistic culture and the theatre "community"
in particular. Then, I will present the project's data concerning the audience.
Subsequently, I will analyze the actor's experiences in order to draw conclusions about
acting itself. Finally, discussion of acting will naturally lead to my final argument
concerning the nature of the theatrical art and its role in society.

THE EXPERIMENT and THE PLAY
The experiment's origins lie in questions concerning the audience's "spectatorial
literacy," the ability to "read" a performance and effectively distinguish content from
form. Spectatorial literacy is a general term, itself comprised of two categories, "readerly
1

competence' and "aesthetic competence." "Readerly competence" refers to a spectator's

ability to understand and correctly interpret action - in other words, to follow a story and
apprehend its events. This addresses content. "Aesthetic competence" refers to a
spectator's ability to understand and evaluate aesthetic convention - in other words, to
separate the means of representation from what is being represented. This addresses fonn.
With the term "aesthetic competence," I do not mean to propagate a doctrine of absolute
or objective aesthetic. Rather, I refer to an individual's ability to apprehend her own
culturally-defined aesthetic, its tropes and conventions. This is a capacity which everyone
possesses, though in different measure. It encompasses not only the ability to distinguish

a good play from a bad play, but the ability to explain why one was good and the other
bad.
One of the primary differences between theatre and other rituals, such as sports, is
the disparity in spectatorial literacy. Any theatre historian can demonstrate that the role
and significance of the audience has changed over the centuries. 13 Specifically, though, I
was curious how a vocal audience, similar to that at a sporting event, might influence a
theatrical performance. Would vocal support or criticism better or detract from the
drama?
Of course, it soon became apparent that such an experiment might also shed light
on another question: that of the disjuncture between the "model" and "actual" readers in
semiotics. 14 Yet to request an audience to explain their perceptions and experiences as
they perceived and experienced them would invariably compromise the results. Whether
a play could even progress under such conditions is also doubtable! In order to
accomplish this, the audience would need to be given a "false premise," something which
would require their vocal support and covertly reveal their theatrical observations.
Gradually, it became apparent that the two questions might be addressed with a
single experiment: permit an audience to suggest alterations to a work. This would
inversely inform an analyst of the perceptions operating across the spectatorial group, and
it would moreover provide recordable evidence of the disparity between intended and
actual meaning. Finally, it would simultaneously betray the audience's spectatorial
literacy.
Obviously, the question of an audience's spectatorial literacy is a complicated
one. For instance, first readings are different from second readings. For a time, I

considered having the audience see the play twice: the first time they would simply watch
the performance, and the second time they would be allowed to make suggestions. This
idea, however, was rejected for two reasons. First, students would never watch the same
show twice. As detailed in the ethnographic analysis, Penn theatre groups survive through
mutual sel±~sponsorship: each group attends the other groups' performances. As such,
spectators at a Penn theatre perfom1ance attend more out of social obligation than artistic
interest. It was therefore unreasonable to expect the students to agree to see the show
twice - a four-hour versus a two-hour social obligation.
Second, such an experiment would inform the analyst of the processes of "rereading," but not initial reading. Invariably, a spectator who has seen a show before, or
who is acquainted with it in some other manner, possesses a higher spectatorial literacy
than one who has not. What subsequent viewings accomplish, in essence, is a reduction
in the complexity of the cultural object. Each time a spectator attends a performance, she
becomes more adept at navigating the web of theatrical signs assaulting her senses.
Certain aspects of the performance can be "tuned out" in a way. While this subject
certainly deserves anthropological scrutiny, I was interested in initial reading operations,
when the object's cultural complexity is most cumbersome. Specifically, I wanted to
understand how a spectator initially navigates theatre's intrinsic semiotic density.
Such an analysis dictates an appreciation of the gap between intended and actual
meaning. Initial reading, as a subject, naturally orientates itself to a discussion of these
different meanings. In order for an analyst to be certain of the intended meaning, he
would need to serve as the author of that meaning himself. So, I chose to direct a play and
conduct just such an experiment. I proposed Gamma Rays, and the experiment, to the

only experimental theatre company on Penn's campus, iNtuitons. They enthusiastically
accepted the project, and soon we were holding auditions for the roles.
Below is the plot snnnnary of Gamma Rays as it was presented to the actors at
auditions. A copy of the character descriptions provided at auditions can also be found in
Appendix B.
Winner of the 1971 Pulitzer Prize, the Obie Award, and the
New York Drama Critics Circle Award as Best American
Play of the season, this powerful and moving study follows
an embittered, vindictive widow and her two young
daughters as they seek to free themselves from their
troubled past and start a new life. Ridiculed by "normal"
society, Beatrice, Tillie, and Ruth retreat into their home,
full of fear and mistrust - the world is a dangerous place,
and it has no place for them. Until, that is, Tillie discovers
the magic of science, and the world is revealed to her in all
its splendor. But her choice to enter the school science fair
threatens to demolish the walls Beatrice has so carefully
constructed around the family and subj eel them to further
torment. Hailed as one of the most significant and affecting
plays of our time, The Effect of Gamma Rays on Man-inthe-Moon Marigolds explores the haunting and formidable
question, "What makes each person important?"

"Let's start with a single, simple word. Power...I don't know
of a better (play) of its genre since THE GLASS
MENAGERIE ... "~ NY Post
Cast in the role of Beatrice was Annie Winter, a sophomore without any theatre
experience; as Ruth, Carly Daucher, an actress in high school who had only perfonned
once previously on Penn's campus, as a member of the chorus in Cabaret; as Tillie,
freshman Ilana Millner, who had acted in high school, primarily in musicals; as Nanny,
freshman Sydney Blum, a veteran actress with an extensive and impressive resume; and
as Janice, freshman Paula Aranda, who had acted in plays at her high school in her
hometown of Madrid, Spain. The actors were selected on the basis of their performance
of the role and, in addition, their success at several improvisational games. Because the
project involved essentially "throwing the actors to the lions," it was imperative that the
actors he gifted improvisers.
The six-week rehearsal period (with a final, seventh week devoted to technical
rehearsals) began on September 181", 2006, with the performances slated for November
2nd , 3''1, and 4th , 2006. This rehearsal period was divided into a two-week "workshop" and
a four-week "standard" rehearsal period (blocking, refinement, etc.). The purpose of the
workshop was to engender cast solidarity and prepare the actors for the audience
participation. In order for the actors to be able to evaluate and respond to the audience's
suggestions, the actors would need to have a strong communitas ( for lack of a better
word). I requested that all the actors participate in the workshop, but Paula declined, due
to outside commitments.

Before progressing, I would like to briefly comment on the actor's communitas.
There were positive and negative aspects to the generation of such solidarity. Obviously,
the generation of group mentality among the actors ran contrary to the goals of the
experiment. It essentially assembled the actors as a group working "against" the audience
as group. Still, while such a dynamic was undesirable, I felt it was necessary to the
execution of the performance. In anticipating the audience's suggestions, I knew that
certain suggestions, though directed at a singular performer, would unavoidably affect
other performers as well. In order for these suggestions to be enacted, to be feasible, the
actors would need to be able to judge one another's comfort with each suggestion. For
example, if a spectator told Beatrice to slap Ruth across the face, Annie would need to
know if Carly would be comfortable enacting such a suggestion.
Consequently, I felt that assembling the actors only as individuals would be
unethical. Annie, as an actor, did not have the right to slap Carly. If such a suggestion
were proffered, both actors would need to agree to it. This required a degree of collective
familiarity, and it was the purpose of the workshop to generate just such unity. In other
words, for practical and ethical reasons, I, as a director and researcher, chose to foster
group mentality among the actors, though such a decision ran contrary to the
experiment's structure.
My hope in this matter, however, was that this would produce a collaborative,
rather than antagonistic, atmosphere. I hoped that gronp mentality would allow for the
enactment of a wider range of suggestions. The positives seemed to outweigh the
negatives. At that point in my thinking, I also believed that the experiment would fracture
the audience, rendering group mentality impossible for them. I speculated that the

performance would engender a diversity of readings, and disagreements among
spectators would prevent the formation of a consensus. To some extent, this was true.
What I did not anticipate, however, was that the actors' performance technique would
destabilize this dynamic.
Though I address this subject in more detail later in the paper, the actors each
performed under the Method acting rubric. The quintessential acting technique for
realistic theatre, Method acting seeks to absorb the audience in the illusion and make
each spectator identify with one or more characters. Method actors want the spectators to
feel what they are feeling. This proved to be the unanticipated x variable in the
experiment.
At the onset of each performance, the audience did not function as a group. They
were still attempting to grasp their role in the experiment. Surprisingly, the actors
generated the audience's group mentality. As this paper documents, many of the
audience's suggestions were ridiculous - the students cared more about impressing their
peers and confirming their social presence than affecting the play itself. This upset the
actors' intention of "drawing in" the audience: they felt like they were failing to capture
the audience. Furthermore, the actors refused suggestions which they felt were
"superficial" or "stupid," per a direction I gave them, which will be discussed below. The
actors, however, took this direction further than intended after engaging with the live
audience, which they felt was "unappreciative" of their artistic efforts. In other words,
they felt the audience was disrespecting them as artists.
Consequently, the actors refused to accept many of the audience's suggestions.
This, of course, angered the audience. They felt that the actors were cheating them, that

their aesthetic contributions were being neglected. Never mind the inane quality of the
suggestions, the audience grew increasingly frustrated with the actors for not enacting
their suggestions. This, in turn, produced a strong group mentality in the audience. In
viewing the tapes, one can mark this progression in each performance. The audience
begins as a collective of individuals, but gradually coalesces into a judgmental, singular
entity. Of course, each audience contained a significant number of "dissenters,"
spectators who disagreed with the increasingly-collective interpretation of the play, but,
to my surprise, they remained silent. I had anticipated some degree of intra-audience
address and even dispute. But direct address was rare, and the audience remained divided
in most performances. There were those who agreed with the group-consensus and
supported one another vocally, and those who disagreed but remained silent, and who
subsequently expressed their discontent in the audience surveys.
All of this will be addressed in great detail later in the essay. For now, I merely
wished to enumerate my reasons for nurturing a group mentality among the actors, and
briefly purvey the consequences of this decision. With this in mind, I return to my
discussion of the rehearsal process, in which I elucidate the construction of this mentality
and our unique preparation for the performances.
Besides the actors, the rehearsals, both workshop and standard, were always
attended by Laird Edge, the stage manager, Jenny Birnkrant, the assistant director, and
myself Again, the primary purpose of the workshop was to generate actor communitas.
This was achieved through a series of games and exercises which taught the actors how
to rely on one another, both personally and artistically, and furthermore introduced them
to increasingly complex fonns of representation. These were the three goals of the

workshop: to foster communitas, to augment the actors' aesthetic competence, and to
initiate them into complex improvisation. Though a full transc1ipt of the exercises
utilized in workshop can be found in Appendix C, a brief description of several of the
exercises will suffice to illustrate the character of the workshop: Staring Game - actors
stare at one another to create understanding and trust; Object Game - actors must use
objects in novel ways, exploring the full dynamic range of the object; Freeze - actors
improvise without structure; Stream of Consciousness - as the name indicates, actors
reveal their thoughts to one another; Face Painting - actors paint one another's faces in
an exploration of art and symbolism. Many of the workshop games were derived from the
work and research of Richard Schechner and Augusto Boal. In accordance with the
second purpose, the workshop also served to introduce the actors to a variety of
performance styles and techniques, from discussion of Kathakali Theatre to experiments
with Brecht's Verfremdungseffekt.
Improvisation was incorporated into most rehearsals during the workshop. At
times, the actors were given free-range with their choices; at other times, I would give
them a character, a scenario, or both. Each improvisation was discussed and evaluated in
tenns of its artistic quality. As a result of this, Laird, Jenny, and I noted considerable
improvement in the quality of the improvisations. The actors quickly learned to work
together and depend on one another, producing a cohesiveness that I have never seen in
any other production. Moreover, the actors performed some of the best improvisations I
have ever witnessed, professionally or non-professionally. Evaluated in these terms, the
workshop was a resounding success. The actors gained a remarkable degree of aesthetic
competence and refined their talents at individual and group improvisation.

Next, we set about rehearsing the play itself. This portion of the process was
"standard" in many regards; it involved the creation of blocking, discussion of character
and character-relations, etc. While I am admittedly glossing over an intricately complex
process which has not yet received proper scientific investigation, it was never my
intention to conduct a process or rehearsal-experiment. It is my hope that, in time,
someone else might utilize this project's data for just such a purpose.
Nevertheless, several aspects of the standard process deserve scrupulous attention.
Roughly speaking, the first two weeks (of the three-week standard rehearsal) were similar
to any other typical American-realism rehearsal. We discussed the dramatic text,
explored interpretations of the material, blocked the show, defined character, fine-tuned
performances, developed character relationships, and honed our artistic decisions. The
last week, however, was devoted to a synthesis of the workshop and the standard
rehearsals; it centered on the actors' improvisations off of the play. Specifically, it was
this last week which most rigorously prepared the actors for the experiment.
By that time, the actors were confident enough in their characters to improvise
and investigate new artistic avenues. The first improvisations revolved around the simple
movement of a set piece or the introduction of an outside character (one not present in the
scene as written). In these early alterations, we (meaning Laird, Jenny, and myself)
seldom gave the actors any guidelines. For instance, we would tell Ruth to enter a scene
without telling her why she was entering.
After each improvisation, we would evaluate the actors' work according to two
criteria: I) its plausibility within the play as written and our dramatic interpretation of it,

and 2) its aesthetic value "proper." By this latter phrase I simply mean, was it good or
bad theatre?
It was during these discussions that we first explored the limits of the experiment.

For instance, because of the integrality of tech in the production, the tech board operators
would obviously need to know when a scene had ended. So, we stipulated that an
improvisation could, in theory, continue for any length of time (though fifteen minutes
seemed a reasonable, "extreme" limit), but that the actors had to return to the written
dramatic text at some point, whether to the original point of departure or elsewhere in the
script.
Also for this reason, improvisations which so altered the play as to eradicate its
storyline could not be accepted, though the audience could still suggest such an
alteration. To provide a rather cruel example, the suggestion that Tillie die could not be
accepted; Nanny, on the other hand, could die because the story could continue without
her presence. We also realized the extreme importance of regulating the temporality of
suggestions: if the play could move backward in time, it might never end.
These first experiments led to the construction of audience guidelines which were
printed on an insert in the program, as well as read aloud to the audience by myself prior
to each performance. Rules were pivotal to the successful implementation of the
experiment. Art is, of course, a very subjective, personal thing; there is significant room
for disagreement. Because the experiment made opinions which were usually internal
external, it could easily produce a contentious and aggressive atmosphere between the
actors and spectators, and among the spectators themselves. Both the iNtuitons board and
I feared that the experiment might even lead to a brawl. Offense was unavoidable - all of

the actors knew going into the performances that they would be offended. Violence, on
the other hand, was avoidable. Consequently, rules were crucial to the experiment.
Below, I have reprinted my speech to the audience before each performance
because a continued anecdotal account of the rules' generation would require
unnecessary space, as well as because it was within this framework which we continued
to rehearse all improvisations that final week.
Good evening, everyone. I'd like to draw your attention to
the pink insert in your program; there you will find the
rules governing our experiment. According to these rules,
you, the audience will be encouraged to do certain things
but will also be prevented from doing others. The first and
most important thing for you to understand is that the actors
and technicians will choose whether or not to enact your
suggestions.

Second,

the

actors

will

not

halt

the

performance to listen to your suggestions. It is pivotal that
you speak loudly and clearly so as to be heard. Now onto
the specific rules. Please follow along as I review them one
by one.
1) Yon cannot prevent the performers from performing.
2) You cannot stop the play from moving forward (i.e. cannot
ask/tell the actors to repeat a section).

3) You may make as many different suggestions as you would
like. However, you may only make the same suggestion
(whether enacted or not) a maximum of three times.
4) You may suggest changing

plot,

character,

acting,

blocking, or direction.
5) You may suggest changing technical aspects (sound, lights,
set, costumes, props).
6) You must designate to whom the suggestion is directed ( if
everyone onstage, then "Everyone"). Tech, on the other
hand, does not need to be designated; simply shout out the
suggestion.
7) Your suggestions may be constructive or deconstructive in
nature, but must pertain to the artistic performance.
8) Have fun! It's always better to suggest something. The
actors and technicians may or may not choose to enact your
idea, but there's nothing to lose in suggesting it.
Again, this experiment will niake for an exciting evening of
theatre, hopefully unlike anything you've experienced
before! I would like to point out that you yourselves are
now participants in this production. Consequently, your
behavior should reflect this position. Your suggestions do
not have to be positive or constructive - they can be
deconstructive or critical, but they should always pertain to

the perji,rmance of the play. Excessively adverse or
aggressive behavior will result in your ejection from the
theatre. This is a serious experiment - we ask for your
respect and cooperation. You may test the actors'
boundaries, but do not taunt them or simply try to mess
them up.
I will be seated at the back of the theatre with a microphone
in hand. If necessary, I might intervene and mediate as
director. The performance should be an exciting and
unusual dialogue between all ofus.
Thank you again for coming. Enjoy the show.
Added to these were several practical guidelines stipulated by myself or adopted
by the actors themselves. To begin with, I recommended that the actors ordy accept
snggestions which would better the drama. My reasons for this were twofold: 1) we
wanted to put on a good play, and 2) I feared that the adoption of "bad" or ridiculous
suggestions would lead to disruptive behavior, sending the performance into a downward
spiral. In addition to this, the actors decided to reject suggestions which applied to more
than one actor unless they could either covertly agree to enact it (by a look or a gesture)
or take it on "good faith" that the other actor would be comfortable with the alteration.
Though I did not know it at the time, the actors also adopted several
"unsanctioned" conditions, which I discovered in the interviews. These will be discussed
later in the essay. For now, I merely wish to emphasize that they were absent from the
rehearsal process.

At one time, I intended to include the technical crew as members of the
"audience." It was my original hope that they, because of their familiarity with the play,
could provide data about "educated" readings. In this way, I could simultaneously collect
empirical data on initial readings and subsequent, informed readings, doubling the
experiment's reach. This idea was dropped, however, for two reasons. First, I worried
that this additional role would distract the technical crew from their more important
duties. Second, the technical crew would only further eradicate the "normal" audience
composition. A tech crew, by definition, cannot constitute a typical audience. Their
inclusion in the audience group, I felt, would so complicate the experiment (and confuse
the "guest" spectators) that it rendered any benefits unequal to the aggravation implicit in
such a provision.
Through our experimentation, we also stumbled upon several technical
limitations. For example, while the suggestion for Beatrice to crush Tillie's marigolds at
the end of act one could be enacted, and the marigolds replaced at the beginning of act
two ending the deviation, we could not practically replace the flowers during
intermission, rendering the suggestion unfeasible in the realistic geme, within which we
were attempting to operate. While other such technical limitations were present, they
were few in number. The more proper technical decisions (lighting, sound, etc.) fell
under the jurisdiction of Laird, the stage manager, who "called" the show. My deposition
from the performance was crucial in the ethical conduction of the experiment. Thus,
Laird, with his intricate knowledge of the play and of the improvisational limitations,
supervised all technical suggestions. As evidenced in the video footage, he was far more

eager to accept suggestions than the actors, a personal disposition which would have a
great effect upon the performances.
With these guidelines in place, we continued our rehearsal improvisations.
Surprisingly (or rather, not so surprisingly), during the performances, the actors on
occasion reverted back to improvisations created in rehearsal. This was particularly
interesting because certain suggestions gave the actors the choice to erect a new dramatic
text or repeat an old one, that of a previously "rehearsed" improvisation. They frequently
chose the latter.
Accordingly, in order to arrive at a sound understanding of the improvisational
extent of the performances, it is necessary to lightly sketch several of the more significant
improvisations we explored in rehearsal. They are presented in no particular order:
Beatrice crushes Tillie's marigolds in I.vii. Ruth enters with the news that Chris Bums
kissed her in I.iii. Nanny dies in I.vii. Nanny dies in II.v., preventing Ruth's seizure.
Nanny dies in II.v. right after Ruth's seizure. Beatrice flirts with Mr. Goodman in Li. and
I.v. Photographers arrive to take Tillie's picture at the end of I.vii. Tillie joins Ruth and
Beatrice in the living room because Ruth wet the bed in I.vi. Ruth has a seizure in I.vi.,
ending the scene. Ruth has a seizure in I.vi., and Beatrice relates her nightmare to Tillie.
Tillie successfully calls the doctor in II.v. Beatrice must go to greater lengths to prevent
Tillie from calling the doctor in II.v. End of act one, keep going. Nanny is brought to the
house by "Miss Career Woman of the Year," outside of the play. Tillie at school, outside
the play. Beatrice at the science fair, outside the play.
After exploring these scenarios, we ran the show without intem1ption, without
constructed scenarios, concentrating instead on generating the atmosphere of a real

performance, with Laird, Jenny, and I shouting suggestions at the actors. We did this
several times. The first time, we forced the actors to enact every suggestion we made,
regardless of its validity or coherence. In later runs, we simulated the true format of the
experiment and granted the actors the agency to accept or reject suggestions. As with all
improvisations, we evaluated each new scenario in terms of its artistic value. Finally, the
rehearsal process came to an end, and we entered "tech week."
Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday of that week were devoted to set construction and
teclmical operations, though we were granted three much-desired run-throughs in the
performance space, one on Tuesday evening, and two on Wednesday evening. These
were incredibly important to us because the actors needed to adjust to the space and the
extremely cluttered set, and because it was our first chance to engage with "unaffiliated"
spectators, namely the tech crew, some of whom had seen the show and some of whom
had not.
Penn theatre companies typically designate one rehearsal as a "designer's run,"
held sometime after the completion of blocking. The purpose of this rehearsal is to
provide the technical designers with a preview of the show. Consequently, several
members of the tech crew had seen the show before tech week, though many had not. Of
course, all of them had read and were familiar with the play. They would be our first
audience.
Tuesday's run and Wednesday's first run were "improvised," but the second
Wednesday run was "straight," in order that we might videotape the play "as rehearsed."
This run would serve as the scientific "baseline" against which all other performances
would be measured.

During the first improvised run, the tech crew shouted out whatever came to their
minds, regardless of its coherence. One person in particular shouted out as many inane
suggestions as she could muster. Because this individual was strongly disliked by the cast
due to several personal conflicts, her comments especially disturbed them. For the most
part, the crew's suggestions were fairly superficial, none of them as difficult or intricate
as those offered in rehearsal (by three highly-competent spectators). The actors felt the
tech crew's suggestions "disrespectful," and reported to me that they had been "thrown
off" by the crew's comments. Several of them were crying after the run, and all of them
were fuming.
Returning on Wednesday with renewed purpose and determination, the actors
performed to a surprisingly reticent tech crew. When asked why they were so quiet, they
simply responded, "We ran out of ideas." With only minimal audience participation, the
actors were able to recover their confidence, which was especially important as we
headed into the performances.
In neither run did the actors accept any large risks, though admittedly few were
proffered by the crew-audience. As we would come to discover with the actual
performances, "deep" suggestions were few and far between. Most of the audience's
suggestions were regarded by the actors as "superficial" and unworthy of enactment,
resulting in fairly ''by-the-book" performances. Finally, while the improvised runs gave
the actors a taste of acting under an "intrusive" audience, it did not prepare them for the
antagonistic character of the real audience's suggestions. Thankfully, a gradual increase
in the size of each performance's audience allowed the actors to adjust to the
complications of a "real" audience.

THE CONTEXT
The University of Pennsylvania boasts a large and diverse artistic culture. With
more than forty stndent-groups organized under the Performing Arts Council, stndents
can become involved in groups ranging from stand-up comedy to African dance to Hindu
a capella to Jewish theatre. Within this broad framework, the theatre arts community'
stands alone.
While other performance groups such as dance, music, and a capella receive wide
support from the stndent body, the theatre arts community is largely self-supporting.
Theatrical performances rarely garner the numbers of other group performances. A
typical audience at a given play will be comprised of 75% theatre members, with the
remaining 25% being friends or family of the cast and crew. At Penn, it is exceptionally
rare for a stndent to attend a play simply out of interest. There are three reasons for this
phenomenon. First, Penn stndents are frankly relatively uninterested in theatre. Despite
theatre's tradition as a "high art," students at Penn express almost no interest in drama.
To what degree this situations stems from the plight of theatre in general in the United
States, I cannot say.
Second, theatre does not hold a high artistic reputation at Penn. By this I mean to
say that most theatre at Penn is, quite honestly, bad. It is not necessarily worse than at
other universities, but for whatever reason students perceive it as being so.
Third, the theatre community is socially insular (thus, its denotation as a
"community"). Theatre members spend the majority of their time with other members,

1

I use the word "community" because it represents how the group members view their organization. It is
utilized with the ful! connotation of the German Gemeinschaft.

attending "exclusive" parties and such. Theatre members also have fewer non-theatre
friends than members of other artistic collectives. Thus, their "social reach" does not
extend as far into the general student body.
1 offer these observations as a member of the "community" for four years. While I
believe my analysis is correct and fair, it is not founded on any systematic observation or
quantifiable analysis proper.
Theatre members, despite the expenditure of considerable energy in feigning
egalitarianism, are nonetheless organized hierarchically. Still, because of its insularity,
everyone knows everyone within the community, at least within reason. This in itself
produces a hierarchy as each member wields an artistic and social status, the former
based in previous performance/contribution and the latter in social exploits (attendance at
parties, etc.).
As a result, theatre members attend plays with a highly-informed "horizon of
expectations," quite distinct from the rest of the "lay" community. 15 Theatre members
have a high spectatorial literacy (at least, in theory) because they know "what to expect"
from a given production. Accordingly, it is imperative to discuss the artistic "track
records" of the company and individuals which produced Gamma Rays.
To begin with, iNtuitons is widely regarded as one of the worst theatre groups as
Penn. The group's constituency has been declining over the past four-year period of my
academic career largely because of popular dislike of the group's leadership. At Penn,
each student group must have a specific, singular purpose; furthermore, each group must
be headed by a student board. Thus, there is the experimental theatre company, the

Jewish theatre company, the socially-relevant theatre company, etc., all governed by
student boards.
Because of a more general decline in the group's reputation prior to my arrival at
Penn, iNtuitons has for the past four years only managed to attract members of the
community unable to attain a board position with any other group. This quickly set
iNtuitons on a downward spiral. To further complicate matters, iNtuitons was
monopolized for several years by a producer-director couple. The plays produced during
their hegemony were stylistically very limited.
Each semester, student directors must write a Direction Proposal to a group's
board of governors. A director (and the show she hopes to direct) are elected on the basis
of this written proposal and a subsequent interview. Occasionally, a group may accept a
director but request that she direct a different play for practical purposes, but this is rare.
iNtuitons, as the experimental company, assigns as its charter the production of avantgarde theatre. Unfortunately, their productions rarely warrant this designation.
While not the case with every group's board members, the iNtuitons board
members, because of their low standing in the community, frequently lack any formal
theatrical training. Thus, their productions take·the shape, not of the avant-garde, but of
uninformed students trying "to do something weird," as one of them openly related to me.
Regrettably, their ignorance makes them gullible, a fact which the producer-director team
managed to exploit over the course of several seasons to the further detriment of the
group's reputation.
During this period, iNtuitons plays served as a forum for the director's
narcissicism. Even when other directors succeeded in interrupting the couple's

domination, their plays conformed to the hedonistic air. They assumed that that was what
one did with iNtuitons. To illustrate, a typical iNtuitons production would be one wherein
a student director proposed to direct a modern classic (say, Miller or Albee), and then
rewrote it herself. Another popular iNtuitons experiment was to combine two tangentially
related plays and present them in a non-conducive space. Because of these poor
experiments, and poor productions, the group experienced a decline in the number of
proposals it received.
At the time of Gamma Rays' production, the iNtuitons board was composed
primarily of new students (freshman and "first-timers") with little social or artistic clout.
ii

The sole exception was the board chair, a highly capable young woman strongly

disliked by the theatre community and widely regarded as a "totalitarian dictator." When
notified of my intent to propose to direct with iNtuitons, many theatre members
responded with, "Are you serious?" Another common reaction was, "You're not going to
do something stupid, are you?"
Of the cast and rehearsal staff, only Laird and I had reputations in the community.
Again, Annie had never acted before; Ilana, Sydney, and Paula were freshmen; and while
Carly had acted in Cabaret, many people did not know her (her social involvement with
the theatre community was scant, though it has since increased). Laird was well-liked and
highly esteemed as a stage manager. An energetic, responsible individual, he was
regarded by all as a central member of the theatre community. Artistically, his reputation
had suffered after he directed a dismal production of The Food Chain the previous fall.
Overall, though, Laird's involvement with the project lent it credence.

By "social clout," I mean the individual's perceived standing in the theatre "community." Essentially, it
refers to the student's public esteem and/or popularity.

ii

While some may question the objectivity of the next section, in which I discuss
my own reputation as a theatre member, I avow that the following characterization is
based not on my own self-perceptions, but on the testimony of other theatre members as
relayed to me in personal discussion throughout my career at Penn. As such,
unfortunately, I cannot provide documentation of these opinions.
At the time of Gamma Rays' production, 1 was regarded as one of the leading
actors and directors at Penn. Socially, however, I was not so well-known. Because of an
admittedly old-fashioned and business-like demeanor, I was perceived as a talented actordirector but "distant" social member. This does not mean I was disliked, but rather that I
was viewed as self-sufficient and intensely serious. Prior to Gamma Rays, I had acted in
numerous productions, for the most part playing the lead. Then, in the fall of 2005, I
directed a production of Peter Shaffer's Equus. At the time, it was lauded as the best play
at Penn in recent memory. After Equus, I returned to acting for a semester. The next fall,
just before Gamma Rays, I directed and acted in a production of Edward Albee's The Zoo
Story. It, too, was declared as the best play produced at Penn.

Stylistically, my acting and directing were described by the community as "dark"
and "intense." Consequently, my choice to direct Gamma Rays, similar to my decision to
work with iNtuitons, came as a surprise to many. Still, the community anticipated the
play's rendition, under my direction, would be intense, focused, and dark. Several
"outside" references to me and my past productions were made by the audience during
the Friday 10 pm and Saturday 8 pm performances which reflect this interpretation of my
work. In the end, however, many theatre members credited Gamma Rays as my one great
failure.

While this project was never intended as a formal study of the audience's horizon
of expectations, one focusing on the audience's pre-show perceptions of the play and how
they determined the audience's character and guided their construction of meaning, a
review of the documents and materials associated with Gamma Rays, which a spectator
might have encountered, is necessary to an understanding of the performance
atmosphere. Because of theatre's insularity, advertising has little effect upon the majority
of a play' s audience. Theatre groups employ the same local businesses in the manufacture
of posters, programs, and tickets. Consequently, production materials across the groups
look remarkably similar. For this reason, theatre groups invest little energy in the creative
production of these materials. Advertisements serve more as a reminder of social
obligation within the community than as a true advertisement.
Theatre advertising takes three distinct forms: 1) a banner on Locust Walk (the
central student walkway) 2) "flyering" (the handing out of approximately 4"x4" flyers on
Locust Walk), and 3) posters erected all over campus. The banner rarely boasts more than
a colorful rendition of the title and accompanying information: location, time, and ticket
prices. Some groups have created a group symbol which they inscribe on banners and
posters, but iNtuitons has no such symbol. Theatre flyers are always roughly the same
size and, in contradistinction to other performing arts groups, are printed on brightly
colored paper as opposed to gloss paper. Flyers contain the title and necessary
information though a tag-line might also be included. A flyer can be found in Appendix J.
Posters vary the most across artistic groups. Visually, the posters adhere to ce1tain
campus fads, but within this imposed range, differ greatly. To clarify, posters ahnost
never contain photographs of the production or its cast. Generally, they consist of a solid

background with colorful illustrations in the foreground. Within this format, the gronps
express their creativity and work to epitomize the tone of the play. The concept for many
posters is derived from a frustratingly literal interpretation of the play's title; Gamma
Rays' poster is a case in point. Students typically create their posters using Adobe

Illustrator, and then send them to a printer for finalization. The Gamma Rays poster is
included in Appendix J.
A fourth but sporadically exploited advertising tactic is the "production t-shirt."
T-shirts are typically solid colored and may or may not contain an illustration on the
front, though they always contain the title and necessary information on the back. Like
posters, t-shirt designs are derived from literal interpretations of the title. Yet again, the
Gamma Rays shirt embodies this artistic frivolity; a photograph of the t-shirt can be

found in Appendix J.
Finally, advertisements exert even less influence on non-theatre members. This is
not so much the fault of the theatre groups as it is the result of the sheer number of
performance groups which advertise on campus. Kiosks and bulletins are always covered
with dozens of advertisements and performance notices. The fact of the matter is that, at
Penn, unless a performance group has a strong reputation in the student body, people will
not likely hear of a performance unless someone they know is involved. This, again,
results in audiences comprised almost entirely of theatre members and friends of
individuals associated with the production.

THE AUDIENCE
One of the reasons for performance theory's trepidation regarding actor-audience
interactions is that the exchange is exceedingly difficult to capture, much less render into

a form of printable data. 16 I do not here wish to engage in a theoretical argument about
the validity or objectivity of video capture and ethnography. A number of excellent books
and articles have been written on the subject, and I encourage the reader to begin study
there. Instead, I would like to point out the more important fact that it is far better to
investigate this phenomenon using limited resources than leave our understanding of it
impotent. What is advantageous about video footage, imperfect though it may be, is that
it is reviewable, and, thus, subject to scientific scrutiny. In this sense, the data is
verifiable. And as performance theory currently lacks performance data, I readily submit
the video footage of Gamma Rays to academic criticism and, hopefully, further empirical
study.
In order to investigate a phenomenon as intricately complex as the actor-audience
dynamic, one must enlist the powers of disparate media. To reiterate, I used one camera
to capture the performance and two hidden cameras on the stage to film the audience
(stage left and stage right, respectively). The video footage is extremely valuable, but it
must be considered in light of this paper and all other documents. Similarly, a sound
understanding of this paper and its conclusions is impossible without rigorous review of
the video footage. Thankfully, the valuable information only available on video
diminishes the need for tedious and redundant summary here. Thus, I will only briefly
touch on specific performances before continuing to my analysis of the experiment as a
whole.
Before progressing, however, I must address a methodological question: should
the audience be regarded as a social or perfonnative entity? In other words, can one speak
of the audience's actions as a "performance?" While many performance theorists would

argue the latter, I have chosen to study the audience as the former, a social entity. A third
position could very well state that the audience is both. Nevertheless, I am hesitant to
speak of the audience as "a performance" for a number of reasons.
First, I believe that the performance rubric has reached a point where it fails to
enhance our understanding of many artistic traditions and social behaviors. The problem
is that one can adopt a stance from which almost everything qualifies as performance, so
that nothing is. Performance is an admittedly complex phenomenon. I myself am unsure
of its definition, despite extensive reading on the subject. In fact, this is one of the
problems with the performance metaphor: it is, in essence, a "just-so story." In other
words, it is simpler to evaluate the project acknowledging that while one could argue
endlessly over whether or not the audience was "performing," few scholars would dispute
the fact that the actors were performing.
On the other hand, one could argue that because the audience, through its
vocality, invaded the performance, it must also be viewed as a performance. Yet, while I
agree that a few isolated comments-behaviors could be dubbed "performative" (as my
analysis will show) I do not believe that the audience's role was wholly performative in
nature. This leads me to my second reason.
The purpose of this study is not to investigate perji,rmance, but acting and
theatre. Thus, according to theatrical definitions of performance, the audience simply
cannot be regarded as "performers": they are not acting. Again, one could argue that they
are "performing," but this paper addresses acting, not performance, which is a much
wider category.

Finally, I believe that the performance metaphor neglects crucial data in the study
of the production of meaning. As I argue in my conclusion, social ( Gese/1s chaft)
attributes of the audience play a pivotal role in the spectator's interpretation of a drama.
Qualities such as class, wealth, race, gender, nationality, etc., influence all perceptual
processes. One cannot study theatrical reception without studying the sociality (the social
behavior and position) of the spectators. Too often the performance metaphor neglects
these factors, instead operating within a community framework (Gemeinschafl). While I
do not directly speak of the audience as a social entity prior to my final argument, all of
my analyses of the audience and its behaviors function within this social framework.
Again, a few instances of "reverse perfom1ance" do exist. But for the most part, the
audience's behavior is better explained as a struggle to apprehend their social and
aesthetic role in the performance. With this in mind, we can begin an individual analysis
of the performances.
The Thursday 8 pm audience was the smallest, an estimated thirty people. If one
listens carefully to the tapes, a handful of recurring voices can easily be discerned. While
this was the case with all the performances (certain individuals spoke out again and
again), it was most pronounced on Thursday. One of the most vocal members of the
audience was actually an iNtuitons board member. A disrespectful, rebellious young man,
he disregarded the stricture that production members were prohibited from making
suggestions. During intermission, I requested that he cease commenting, and he
cooperated. With his absence, there was a marked decrease in the number of suggestions
offered in the second act. Still, what was most interesting was that he frequently made
suggestions which correctly anticipated future events (he was, of course, familiar with the

play). This curious practice will prove pertinent in the final analysis. Overall, the
Thursday audience, perhaps because of its size, was mostly reticent. They seemed
particularly unsure of what to do, how to behave.
In terms of the performance itself, it was quite similar to the baseline dress
rehearsal. Save for a few minor deviations, the actors performed just as we rehearsed it.
By this I do not mean that they followed the blocking, etc., which was obviously always
the case. Rather, I mean that the performance displayed the intended character and tone.
Yet it was also disappointingly lifeless, lacking energy and commitment. This was most
likely due to some hesitation on the part of the actors, who were attempting to "get a feel"
for what to expect from the audience. In post-show interviews, the actors characterized
the Thursday performances as a "safe start" to the experiment.
The Friday 7:30 pm performance proved the most harrowing for the actors. They
were nothing short of "disturbed" by the audience. In interviews, both Annie and Sydney
in particular spoke of the audience's hostility, the result of the audience's frnstration with
the actors' selectiveness regarding comments. It was with the 7:30 performance that the
actors first began to utilize the "war" metaphor, which would come to serve as their
primary characterization of the experience. Annie and Sydney also stated that the 7:30
audience "pulled them out." After a certain point in the performance, they both said that
they effectively "shut down" and refused to honor the communicative circuit with the
audience.
Both during the live performance and in reviewing the tapes afterward, I
disagreed with the actors that the 7:30 audience was more antagonistic than others. In my
opinion, the source of the actors' frustration is attributable to the specific intersection of

personal dispositions and isolated comments. For instance, Annie was deeply upset by
one female's suggestion: "Show us your boobs." Though this was only one of host of
inappropriate, disparaging comments, it greatly disturbed Annie because she is to this day
an ardent feminist. While it is impossible to discuss the audience's suggestions without
taking into account the respective personalities of the actors, this example demonstrates
the highly subjective nature of the actor-audience dynamic. In such a case, the singular
knowledge of a participant ethnographer is essential to the decoding of noteworthy
interactions. However, the details of such an analysis quickly become unwieldy. This
example also illustrates the depth and complexity of the Gamma Rays project, or of any
project scrutinizing actor-audience interactions for that matter. It represents another level
of analysis, one so intricate and labyrinthine that it could easily fill a 1000-page tome.
Personally, I feel such an analysis is crucial to an empirical understanding of theatre, but
how to go about accomplishing it, I do not know.
For reasons that will be explored later, the 7:30 performance was one of the two
best performances, in close competition with the Saturday 8 pm performance. Affronted
though they were, the actors gave convicted performances. Finally, while the Thursday
audience was a fair mixture of theatre members, friends, and family, the Friday audience
was almost solely comprised of friends of the cast and crew. It was perhaps two-thirds
larger than the Thursday audience, at an estimated fifty spectators.
Of specific interest, the Friday 7: 30 perfom1ance was the first time the actors
accepted a spectator's suggestion by referring back to a "rehearsed" improvisation. In the
"nightmare scene" (I.vi.), Tillie repeated the scenario that Ruth had "peed in the bed."
Also, the 7:30 audience was the first to address the experiment directly, though both

subsequent audiences would do this. At one point, a young woman said, "You 're not
taking any of our suggestions," which elicited an "Ooh ... " from the rest of the audience.
Her hushed tone betrayed a certain degree of hesitation, but her statement was incredibly
important in that it encapsulated the audience's frustration with the experiment's "false
premise." Another fascinating occurrence took place in 11.i. A young woman, attempting,
like many others, to convince Beatrice to go to the science fair, did not address Beatrice
herself, but "outside" phenomena. To clarify, instead of shouting "Beatrice, go!" as other
spectators did, she suggested to the tech, "Blow the horn again." While, in reading this,
one might contest that the spectator merely wanted to hear the horn honk again, her tone
of voice sounds an urgent plea, as if she hoped that Beatrice would respond to interior
stimuli having ignored external stimuli (the audience).
The Friday 10 pm performance could best be described as "ridiculous." In Penn
theatre, it is an unspoken tradition for a company to perform the "late show" as a joke.
Typically, the cast and crew infuse these late performances with intra-theatre jokes and
puns. Of course, this produces an inordinately vocal audience, even in performances
which do not incorporate audience participation. Though we made no such indication
publicly or privately that our late performance would adhere to this tradition, theatre
members assumed as much. They came in droves. Aside from theatre members, who
constituted an estimated 80% of the audience, some parents were in attendance, and a
reasonable number of friends. Audience "clumps," most of them theatre subcommunities, are clearly visible in the video footage.
The homogeneity of the audience, and its assumption about the perpetration of
this tradition, engendered a unique performance. As the audience discovered that the

experiment was not a joke (i.e. was notfimny), they attempted to remedy the situation by
making intra-theatre references and jokes themselves. Simultaneously, however, the
theatre members' high spectatorial literacy resulted in more aesthetic suggestions than
any other performance. Because of their familiarity with the art and comfort within the
social group, the theatre members were exceptionally vocal.
Of interest in the IO pm performance were suggestions pertaining to
representation itself. One young man suggested that the actors ( Annie and Carly at the
time) "Switch roles." Other individuals used their suggestions to bolster their position
within the community and express their opinions about that community. For example,
"techies" in the audience persistently yelled for the lights to be turned on during scene
changes because the stage hands "are people, too, you know." As one would expect, these
sorts of comments begat a convivial atmosphere.
Also of note, the actors once again enacted a suggestion by referring back to a
"rehearsed" improvisation, this time at the play' s conclusion. When Ilana took up the
suggestion to call the doctor in spite of Beatrice's order not to, Annie solved the problem
by ripping out the phone cord, just as she had done in rehearsal.
The actors, performing just after the stressful 7:30 performance, did not invest
themselves as fully. While the actors never enacted suggestions with which they were
uncomfortable, this was especially true at the IO pm performance. Again, one of the
criteria for the actors concerned the artistic value of a suggestion. While the comments of
the highly "theatrical" audience were undoubtedly well-infimned, the actors did not
consider them any more aesthetically viable. Honestly, I would concur with their ruling.

While we had almost reached capacity with the Friday 10 pm performance (an
estimated 100 patrons), we actually over-sold the Saturday 8 pm show. Consequently, we
had to move in extra chairs to accommodate everyone, an estimated 130 people. This
. audience was heavily comprised of theatre members, though because of its sheer size, it
also had a significant number of friends and family. Estimating, again, theatre members
constituted some 60% of the audience. Despite the homogeneity of the 10 pm
performance, the Saturday audience was the most cohesive. This was certainly due to its
size, but it is also my suspicion that word had spread about the show, so that by Saturday,
the audience knew more about what to expect Interestingly, however, by the second act,
this cohesiveness had begun to fracture, and several theatre members began to dominate
the suggestions. Thronghout, the audience was highly reactive to itself, a trait similar to
the 10 pm andience, though this was more surprising with such a heterogonous group.
For the most part, the audience's suggestions conformed to the tropes of the
previous shows. Of note in this performance, however, was the audience's curious
anxiety about a wardrobe mishap. That night, Carly-Ruth's seizure left her shirt
abnormally high, exposing her black bra; this bra had actually been visible throughout the
second act dne to the transparency of the short sweater' she wore over it Thus, it was both
surprising and endearing that the audience made a considerable fuss for someone to "put
[a] blanl,et over Ruth.'' In my opinion, the nature of their concern was rooted in the
fictional situation which had produced the exposure, namely, Ruth's seizure. In other
words, the fictional situation created a "real" concern for the actor, not the character,
which the audience sought rectified. In the world of the play, the exposure of Ruth's bra
would not have elicited a reaction, and neither Tillie nor Beatrice would have covered

Ruth - they're family. The audience was anxious for Carly, their sympathy aggrandized
by the fictional seizure.
The Saturday perf01mance also contained the most debatable and thoughtprovoking comment of the Gamma Rays nm. In II.i, Ruth tells Beatrice that everyone at
the science fair is waiting to laugh at her. At that time, one young man suggested, "Ruth,
come stand in the aisle and do this scene." Now, this comment can be read in two
different ways. The first reading is that the spectator simply wanted Ruth to break the
fomih wall, for fun. The second interpretation is far more complicated. The young man
offered his suggestion after many other spectators had already shouted, "Don't tell her."
The timing of this is important. In all of the perfonnances, Beatrice was a constant source
of ridicule for the audience. Comments relating to Beatrice were fewer than those relating
to Nanny, but comments directed at Beatrice were filled with a tangible animosity. It is
my opinion, then, that this young man did a profound thing: he (incorrectly) linked the
audience's ridicule of Beatrice with the mockery of the school officials, following an
understanding that it was my directorial intention to draw a social parallel. In other
words, he combined three "realities" (the illusion of the play, the reality of the actors, and
the reality of the audience) and conflated them into one grand statement about social
behavior. By asking Ruth to come stand in the aisle, he was attempting to make this
"intention" visible - Ruth stands among Beatrice's enemies (the audience) and informs
her that "they're all waiting."
As previously mentioned, the actors gave a fine performance on Saturday. The
audience's responsiveness undoubtedly contributed to the quality and energy of the first
act. But by the "nightmare" scene, things had begun to wane. In this scene, the audience

became almost oppressively vocal. The actors were frustrated, but redoubled their efforts
in the second act, to limited success.

In the end, the success of the experiment depends on the questions one asks, the
critical position one adopts. For the most part, the audience judged the play-experiment a
failure, claiming that the actors "didn't take enough suggestions." Others encouraged,
"Be more experimental." Specifically, the audience was frustrated by the combined
factors of the experiment's false premise and the actors' rejection of their suggestions.
Because the audience believed that the goal of the experiment was to change the play,
they could not understand why more suggestions were not enacted. This, again, was
partially the result of my directive to the actors to accept only aesthetically viable
suggestions, but more so the result of the actors' irritation with the audience's
nnwillingness to become "absorbed," according to realistic acting. Surprisingly, as a
review of the audience surveys clearly indicates, while the audience frequently rejected
the experiment, and sometimes the performance too, they always separated the two. One
could speak of the experiment, and one could speak of the performance. The two did not
go hand in hand. For instance, numerous spectators wrote that it was a wonderful
performance but a bad experiment.
This point is intriguing, and reveals much about the audience's perception of the
Gamma Rays production. Contrary to the audience, I am not prepared to distinguish the

performance from the experiment; they are, in my opinion, symbiotic. Every audience
influences a perfonnancc, and each audience must be analyzed in its respective
communicative circuit. What is most important at this juncture is that the Gamma Rays

audieuce was not typical. The audience was not asked to remain silent, to lose themselves
to the drama. Pitting the experiment against realistic theatrical convention, the
experiment's structure deconstructed the "typical" audience role, but, in doing so, it made
the audience documeutable. As such, two conclusions are discernable among the data.
The first of these pertains to the behavior of the audience, and the second to the
audience's spectatorial literacy. While each may be (and is) considered independently,
the two are blatantly interrelated.
To reiterate my definitions, spectatorial literacy is a general term, itself comprised
of two categories, readerly competence and aesthetic competence. To reiterate, "readerly
competence" refers to a spectator's ability to understand and correctly interpret action in other words, to follow a story and apprehend its events. This addresses content.
"Aesthetic competence" refers to a spectator's ability to understand and evaluate
aesthetic convention - in other words, to separate the means of representation from what
is being represented. This addresses form. Another way to conceptualize the distinction,
though the comparison is less· apt, is to consider aesthetic competence as the sign and
readerly competence as the referent. With the term "aesthetic competence," I do not mean
to propagate a doctrine of absolute or objective aesthetic. Rather, I refer to an individual's
ability to apprehend her own culturally-defined aesthetic, its tropes and conventions. This
is a capacity which everyone possesses, though in different measure. It encompasses not
only the ability to distinguish a good play from a bad play, but the ability to explain why
one was good and the other bad.
To begin with, the audience, for the most part, kept the fictional realm of the play
separate from the real experience of "being in the audience." Furthermore, the audience,

whether hetero- or homogenous in nature, expended more energy m affecting the
audience than affecting the play.
The suggestions made by the audience operated in a particular semiotic model.
One must consider them not only as addressed to the actors but to the also-listening
audience. In this model, the actor is the Addressee, and a fellow spectator is a Hearer. 17
One can think of this exchange in tenns of the phrase, "I dare you," the weight of which
stems from its utterance in the presence of additional Hearers. 18
In every performance, the majority of the audience's comments were formally
directed to the actors, but were infonnally directed to the Hearers. I have provided a
Suggestion Taxonomy in Appendix I, in which I have categorized the audience's
suggestions in an effort to delineate the social interactions taking place in the experiment.
These categories are not rigid and separate but overlap. A given suggestion could satisfy
multiple criteria; in fact, most suggestions do. All suggestions cite the performance from
which they were taken, but they must be read in context for full appreciation.
Overall, suggestions ranged from the simple, "Turn the lights on," to the highly
complex, "Spotlight on the cage." Yet each one must be analyzed within the AddresseeHearer semiotic framework. Some suggestions were intended only for the audience.
These could take the form of direct address to the audience as a collective, "Applause,"
or direct address to individual spectators, "Sheira, suggest something." Other suggestions
were addressed to the experimenters (i.e. the cast, the crew, and myself), "You're not
taking any of our suggestions," or to specific individuals involved in the production,
"Laird, call the show in Spanish." Ultimately, all these suggestions attest to the
audience's constant self-awareness.

This self-awareness was undoubtedly imposed by the experiment itself. Realism
strives to obliterate consciousness of representation and artifice; the experiment exploded
this possibility. In asking the audience to comment on the artistic performance, we were
effectively preventing them from becoming "totally" absorbed (i.e. to the point of
complete suspension of disbelief), though absorption and identification did occur.
In surveys, spectators declared that they felt uncomfortable making suggestions in
more "serious" scenes. In many ways, the audience had a particularly difficult time
ridding themselves of American theatrical convention. In this sense, the experiment could
not snccessfully uuravel the audience's ties to the realistic geure. As Marvin Carlson has
pointed out, audiences are more comfortable with plays they can experience in generally
predictable ways.

19

In line with the project's experiment-realism opposition, many aspects of the
performance intentionally adhered to realistic convention. There was a foyer outside of
the rehearsal space where the audience gathered before and after the performance and
during intermission; tickets were sold in this foyer, though some students had purchased
tickets on Locust Walk earlier in the week; the doors which separated the foyer from the
performance spac·e were opened approximately fifteen minutes prior to show time (the
opening of the "house"); ushers tore the spectators' tickets and handed them the Gamma
Rays program; the stage was a proscenium stage, demarcating the performance space
from the audience space; audience seating was divided into two sections with a row down
the center; spectators were allowed to sit where they wanted; all stage hands and crew
were invisible during this period; "house music" was played until the start of the show; a
(student) MC made announcements prior to the show (specifically, it was the show's

producer, Michael Sloan Warren); and the lights were dimmed, signaling to the audience
the beginning of the perfonnance. Only two aspects of the otherwise naturalistic
perfom1ance were changed: I spoke with the audience prior to each performance,
dictating the rules of the experiment, and, most importantly, the audience was allowed to
speak during the performance. All of these are, of course, practical conventions, rituals
pertaining to the demarcation of time and space designated for performance. Other,
subtler conventions pertaining to American realism were at work.
The most significant of these was the audience's preoccupation with notions of
"appropriateness." Certain scenes, and certain moments within scenes, were judged as
appropriate or inappropriate for comment. For exan1ple, in "serious" scenes, comical
suggestions were reviled. One could feel a tension in the audience during such situations,
though this sort of data cannot be captured on videotape. The best evidence for this
phenomenon can be found in the audience surveys (Appendix H), where numerous
audience members discussed their feelings of "appropriateness."
Apparently, what happened was that .the audience successfully maintained the
experiment's requested-critical distance in comedic scenes, but, in more dramatic scenes,
many spectators became absorbed in the drama ont of concern for the characters, in
accordance with realism. Because a portion of the audience was "enveloped" in the
fictional world, any suggestion that "pulled them out," particularly an inane suggestion,
was met with sharp, ll11Spoken criticism. This, of course, did not prevent certain students
from making "inappropriate" comments at "inappropriate" times. But for the most part,
the audience remained silent in tin1es of increased dramatic tension.

"Pulled out" is exactly the phrase spectators employed in describing the
experience, the same phrase the actors used in referencing times when the audience
disrupted their connection to their character. Spectators used this phrase in speaking with
me and with the actors. As a result, the knowledge that the audience could be "pulled
out" too, led the actors to contend that the audience was "performing" just as much as
they were. When I inquired as to what the actors meant by "performing," the actors
explained that they believed the onstage world was more "real" than the audience,
following a definition of performance as "semblance."
Another reason the actors chose to speak of the audience in terms of
"performance" was because several of the actors were asked by their friends after the
show, "Did you hear me? I made a suggestion. Could you tell it was me?" The actors thus
concluded that the experiment had produced two simultaneous performances. I, on the
other hand, refer to such instances as "reverse performances," which do lend credence to
the argument that the audience was performing, though I have already expressed my
opinions on this matter:
What does seem true overall is that the spectators were consistently aware of their
position as "speakers." One spectator told me, in personal discussion, that the experience
made him feel both atomized and part of a great collective. When his op1mon or
suggestions differed from his fellow spectators, or he considered a scene more or less
appropriate for response, he felt particularly atomized. Yet when he felt others'
suggestions were made appropriately, were funny, or were in agreement with his opinions
about the performance, he described a feeling of"uuity."

It is surprisiug, in hearing such testimonies, that the spectators did not talk to one

another more often. There were several occasions in which one spectator addressed
another, but on the whole these were rare. Spectators said afterward that they would have
liked to address one another but did not think it permissible under the rules. For the most
part, the audience did abide by the rules of the experiment. As would be expected, some
students occasionally broke the rules, and 1 was forced to publicly remind them of the
experiment's restrictions. Once I had made this am1ouncement, however, intra-audience
disapproval prevented the incident from recurring.
Overall, these intra-audience "undercurrents" proved the most fascinating. That
the audience silently judged scenes "appropriate" or "inappropriate" is most intriguing, as
is the fact that their judgment of a scene's "appropriateness" rarely coincided with the
importance of the content or the intensity of the representation. What I mean by this is
that the audience did not always judge a scenes import "correctly." For example, the
"nightmare" scene (I.vi.) was virtually inaudible in every the performance. The audience
deemed it suitable for intervention; yet it is one of the most important scenes in the play.
While the play's climax lies in I.vii. with Tillie's entry into the science fair, the nightmare
scene is the climax for Beatrice's character arc. In this scene, she reaches rock-bottom
and decides to change her life. It is because she is in this state that she reacts so violently
to Tillie's entry in the science fair; her realization in I.vi. lights the fuse that will explode
in 11.i. The audience, however, never listened to, and therefore never understood, this
scene. One spectator wrote on the survey that the scene was poorly written and should
have been excised from the script/performance.

The audience was always cnriously silent at the beginning of act two. Several
things contributed to this. First, the scene followed intermission, which forced the
audience to reorient itself. Second, Tillie and Ruth began the scene. Beatrice and Nanny
were the focus of the majority of suggestions, and with those two characters gone, the
audience seemed more willing to watch the play. Third, there is the possibility that the
audience felt the need to "be respectful" for Tillie. Ilana looks particularly youthful, and
as she had never performed at Penn before, many spectators believed she was an elevenyear-old girl we had enlisted from the West Philadelphia neighborhood.
Part of the audience's vocality had to do with what they "had to work with." One
of the categories in the suggestion taxonomy is "lntertextual." Broadly speaking, all of
the audience's suggestions were based on some sort of association, and most focused on
content. Truly aesthetic suggestions (i.e. suggestions directed specifically to the actors
with little or no regard for the other Hearers) were infrequent. Scenes that have a wider
intertextual framework received more comments. For instance, scenes containing
smoking or drinking received the most comments because the student-audience could
link it with personal experiences. Overall, the audience offered an extremely limited set
of comments. The actors described the audience's suggestions as "superficial," and in
tenns of diversity and aesthetic or creative weight, they were.
As Bennett states, theatre is a dual experience: you pay to see the show, and you
pay to have the experience of being in a theatre. 20 In the case of Gamma Rays, the social
aspect eclipsed the artistic experience. Spectators devoted the majority of their energies
to influencing their fellow Hearers. The spectators used the vocal opportunity, not to

change the play, but to confirm their place in a community, to make themselves present.
Inside jokes, outside references, and ridiculous suggestions all served this aim.
Another tactic the spectators' employed centered on making a suggestion they
knew was coming. A handful of spectators actually attended the performance twice, and,
interestingly, in their second attendance, made suggestions moments before they were
scheduled to be enacted according to the script. This example, above all, testifies to the
audience's preoccupation with affirming its social collectivity. Thus, Gamma Rays was
first and foremost a social experience, and only secondarily an aesthetic one.
The experiment's second focus regarding the audience centers on their
spectatorial literacy, their ability to read the perfom1ance, both content and form. As
previously mentioned, comments were first directed to the other Hearers, and only
secondarily to the Addressees. Thus, one must parse suggestions in order to reduce them
to their aesthetic content. Furthermore, one must always consider an audience's
competence in relation to the culture in which the performance takes place. By their very
attendance at the performance, the audience subliminally accepts a particular aesthetic
framework. Any play that is produced has already undergone social appropriation. As
Naumann states, "[T]hey have been selected for reception through social institutions,
made available by the latter, and in most cases also have already been evaluated
thereby. " 21
In other words, Gamma Rays was produced at Penn because it adhered to a
specific cultural aesthetic

~

broadly speaking, American realism, but narrowly speaking,

the Perm artistic culture. As previously discussed, while the majority of spectators attend
a play out of social obligation, their election to actually attend the play reveals certain

factors about them. To approach the topic at its simplest level, the fact that all of the
students attend Penn, an Ivy League university, means that they in some way subscribe to
the artistic culture and ideologies of the institution. Thus, the audience must be analyzed
according to its subscription to these cultural and aesthetic ideologies. A spectator's
attendance exteriorizes a particular social relationship to art, determined "by his [sic]
membership in a class, stratum, or group, by his material situation (income, leisure, living
and working conditions, and general way of life); by his education, knowledge, and level
of culture, his aesthetic needs; by his age, and even by his sex, and not least by his
attitude to the other arts, and especially to the very literature that he has already given a
·
recept10n
to. ,,22

Finally, this aesthetic framework, which the spectator supports through patronage,
informs her of the type of reading she must do. Cultural norms discourage a free play of
attention across an admittedly broad perceptual field. 23 In other words, the spectator's
social position and subscription to cultural ideologies determine what she pays attention
to in a play. This is her spectatorial literacy. How well does she read the content of the
drama? More importantly, how aware is she of the aesthetic framework itself? Realism
works to conceal this framework, while Brechtian epic theatre emphasizes it.
Specifically, I sought to measure the audience's ability to read American realism, both its
content and form. This topic invariably concerns my position as director.
The purpose of the director in American theatre is to guide the audience's
interpretation of a work. Sometimes, the goal is to reduce the disparity between intended
meaning and perceived meaning; other times, the goal is to create a variety of readings.

The latter objective is more common in avant-garde theatre. American realism strives for
the former ambition, to reduce disparity between intended and actual meaning.
Because realism seeks to "draw in" the spectator, it works to eradicate artifice and
anything else that might distance the spectator. This does not mean that realism
discourages multiple interpretations; it simply means that the geme seeks to produce as
few different interpretations as possible. For realism, a different interpretation is viable so
long as it still involves the spectator's absorption in the drama.
Dozens of directing books, and many more college courses, enumerate "directing
guidelines" to accomplish this very task. For example, in general, spectators pay more
attention to a character who is speaking than a character who is not speaking. Thus, in
measuring the audience's spectatorial literacy, one inexorably measures the gap between
the intended meaning as constructed by the actors and director and the actual meaning of
the audience. Thus, when I refer to the audience's spectatorial literacy, both readerly
(content) and aesthetic (form), I cite their ability to correctly interpret what we
represented.
The purpose of this research is not to generate a polemic against the audience,
citing their "frnstrating inability" to read "brilliant direction," or anything such as that.
Rather, the experiment's purpose is to expose the very processes of perception engaged in
watching a theatrical play. Thus, my subject has less to do with an audience's correct or
incorrect interpretation of the work, and significantly more to do with why such
interpretations are so.
Susan Bennett, in her work Theatre Audiences, has posed that

The audience is likely at the outset of a performance to read
the stage as macrocosm. All elements may be taken as of
more or less equal importance in establishing a hypothesis
of the nature of the on-stage world. As the performance
continues, elements such as set tend to be assumed by the
audience unless they are in some way drawn back into the
spectator's focus (as in the case of a set change). As the
world, and the characters within that world, become
known, the audience's concentration tends to move to the
smaller details

(facial

express10ns,

gesture,

costume

?4

changes, and so on). -

On an intuitive level, this idea makes complete sense. The data, unfortunately, did
not reveal the operations of any such process. This does not disprove Bennett's theory; it
simply does not support it. While the audience's comments unquestionably revealed a
perceived hierarchy of information (over the course of the entire play), they did not
provide evidence for such a "hierarchical descent." The audience focused on two things
in particular: I) the ·actors, and 2) the tech. With the tech, the audience only concentrated
on it when it was altered, which conforms to Bennett's theory. With the actors, however,
the audience did not adhere to any such schemata. By that I mean that they did not
supremely focus on the character speaking. Rather, their focus centered on characters
which could most readily aid in their primary goal of influencing the Hearers. For
instance, Nanny was extremely popular among the students because she was the easiest to
make fun of.

The experiment, and the audience's awareness of itself, caused the fracture of the
audience rather than its unification. This is what made the Saturday audience so unique.
Size, of course, contributed most to this unity. Similarly, the theatre members' comfort
with the social composition of the audience led them to increased vocality. But it did not
result in a homogeneity of response. Overall, in fact, the audience's vocality determined a
heterogeneity of response, which contradicts Keir Elam's semiotic analysis.

25

Ellis has proposed that audiences will relate to films (in this case, plays) as
individuals when the play is intelligible to the consensus. When the play is nnintelligible,
the individual will relate to her group throngh joint mockery or criticism.

26

Gamma Rays

supports this idea, but in a different way. Because, in the end, the audience rejected the
experiment and only then the perfonnance, their rejection must be interpreted as a
reaction not to the intelligibility of the content, but to their confusion about the
experiment itself. Suggestions became increasingly comic as the audience became more
frustrated. This, in tum, influenced the audience's ability to relate to the characters and
the fiction in general. 27 In this manner, the audience's awareness of the experiment and
itself effectively distanced them from the content. One might assume that from this
position, they would become more .aware of the artifice and the means of representation,
but this was not the case. Even though the audience's self-consciousness infmmed their
relation to content, it did not affect their ability to read content, save for direct address to

the structure of the experiment itself, which I exclude because of its blatant obviousness.
To put it simply, the audience's selt~awareness distanced them from the fiction,
but did not produce a critical reading of the means of representation. The audience's

comments continued to focus on content, leading to the conclusion that the audience
exhibited high readerly competence, but low aesthetic competence.
The audience clearly understood content. Their suggestions functioned both
within the framework of the fiction and without it. It depended on the comment's
directionality to the Hearers. For example, as the Suggestion Taxonomy indicates, the
audience made suggestions which conformed to a character's previous behavior and
suggestions which completely ignored previous behavior. The former were genuinely
directed to the actors and were serious in tone. The latter, however, were usually comical
and/or ridiculous in nature, and were obviously directed more to the Hearers than the
Addressees.
Interestingly, the audience was constantly aware of the actors as college students.
Save for Ilana, about whom there was much confusion, their knowledge of the actors as
college students was evinced in the numerous beer jokes the audience proffered. Giving
beer to Nanny is funny because she is both a college student and an old woman. This
leads one to conclude that the audience held a dual consciousness in their minds - that of
the actor and the character. In this sense, the play failed in its realistic ambitions because
of the experiment itself (which oddly produced a vaguely Brechtian effect). Despite the
fact that all other aspects of realistic theatre were maintained (proscenium stage,
blackouts, etc.), the experiment effectively demolished the play's "absorptive" powers.
This directly contributed to the spectators' frequent claim that they did not
identify with the characters. If they did, it was with Tillie, which, at an Ivy League
school, is not surprising. In watching the tapes, then, one cannot assume that silence
reflects absorption. Many spectators disclosed a deep emotional reaction to the drama but

not absorption or identification. In other words, they were deeply impacted by the
performance (its content and execution), but not to the point of envelopment which
realism aspires to.
The greatest evidence for the absorption of some members could not,
unfortunately, be adequately captured on videotape. Instead, I direct the reader to the
audience surveys in Appendix H, wherein numerous spectators expressed their frustration
in being "pulled out." During the live performance, particularly in scenes of considerable
dramatic intensity, one could sense a palpable tension in the audience. Occasionally, a
student would make yet another inane suggestion, but this time, her suggestion would be
met with silent disdain. Comments made during intense moments (such as the end of the
play) were always met with such silent disapproval. Whether this was because of the
emotionality of the content, the absorption of some of the spectators, or simply out of
respect for the actors, it is impossible to tell. But the fact remains that, again, the audience
considered

certain moments

"appropriate"

for

comment

and

other moments

''inappropriate," as expressed on numerous audience surveys.

A handful of suggestions do, in fact, testify to the audience's absorption in the
drama, at least for a period of time. In particular, Beatrice's decision to murder the pet
rabbit Peter met with open condemnation. The fact that Peter was a stuffed animal, and
that the audience knew this, renders their attempts to stop Beatrice as "genuine." In the
real world of the play's performance, there is no reason to prevent Annie from murdering
a stuffed animal. The audience's protests only make sense within the confines of the
fictional reality. Moreover, the tone and urgency of many of these suggestions further
confirm the audience's commitment to the suspension of disbelief

Still, while the audience may have weaved in and out of absorption and, to a
lesser degree, identification, and while they seemed to have held a dual consciousness in
their minds during the performance, they still exhibited a surprisingly poor aesthetic
competence. As discussed previously, all suggestions must be evaluated within the
Addressee-Hearer model and in light of the specific cultural aesthetic of the performance.
Overall, aesthetic suggestions tended toward very simple alterations, such as "Bring the
rain back," or "Try projecting," both of which confirm an awareness of representation,
but a simplistic understanding of it.
Some comments mimicked the structure of improvisational exercise. Suggestions
like, "Can everyone speak in a Russian accent?" are nonsensical, but they are common in
theatre improv games. Still other suggestions were based in cultural-aesthetic tropes; but
broke the aesthetic as constructed by the actors and tech crew. For example, the recurrent
suggestion to put a "Spotlight" on a character is based in theatrical aesthetic, but not
realism. Accordingly, this suggestion can be interpreted in two ways; first, the spectator
wished to alter the performance with a common theatrical device, regardless of its
aesthetic effect, or second, the spectator wished to alter the performance and break the
current aesthetic, reflecting a knowledge of representation and simple theatrical
convention. In other words, both break the realistic aesthetic, bnt one is accidental and
the other intended. Of course, intentionality is impossible to penetrate. So the question
then becomes whether or not the audience could read the disruption of the aesthetic. The
laughter surrounding the use of the spotlight would argue that they could. However, this
would seem to indicate that the spotlight might merely have been employed in order to
affect the Hearers yet again. Either way, though intention remains obscure (aesthetic or

social?), the use of a spotlight remains a simplistic representational alteration and does
not support a high aesthetic competence.
There were, spread among the four performances but concentrated in the Friday
1O pm performance (that most attended by the theatre community), a handful of
suggestions which directly addressed the means of representation. One young man
suggested that the actors, "Switch roles." The actors, however, chose not to enact this
suggestion because of its difficulty. Another intriguing suggestion came on Saturday
night at the end of II.iii. After Peter's "murder," one young man shouted out, "Spotlight
on the cage." Though intended as a joke, this suggestion ironically played off of the
spotlight-convention utilized by others. It most certainly testifies to a keen aesthetic
sense. Finally, the aforementioned suggestion, "Ruth, come stand in the aisle and do this
scene," would seem to indicate a high aesthetic competence. Yet these suggestions were
isolated comments, and they were far from the norm.
In summay, the audience followed plot well. While they occasionally disregarded
"logical" behavior in making suggestions to the actors, one can conclude that they
understood the characters, and felt reactions to them. People, for instance, were disgusted.
by Beatrice, as elucidated in the surveys, and in suggestions like, "Beatrice, shut up." For
most of the show, the majority of spectators sustained a dual consciousness. Some,
however, were absorbed by the production, and a few identified with the characters
(mostly Tillie). The effect of the absorption upon these spectators was sufficient to
engender a "respectful" atmosphere at times.
The experiment contributed to the audience's awareness of representation but did
not engender a critical reading of it. It was awareness in the most limited sense. On the

few occasions when spectators did alter the representation, they did so in a manner that
either knowingly or unknowingly disregarded the realistic aesthetic of the play. Whether
they did not know how to operate within this aesthetic or simply chose not to, the
spectators always suggested representational alterations that conformed to simplistic
American-theatrical conventions. Thus, in the end, the audience exhibited a high readerly
competence, successfully perceiving the play' s events and characters, but a low aesthetic
competence despite the self-consciousness produced by the experiment itself.
Finally, one must always keep in mind that this was a student performance with a
student audience. All the results of the experiment derive from this fact. The spectators'
knowledge of the actors and crew affected their interpretation of the play. Student
traditions and conventions at Penn dictated the audience's conduct and reception. The
self-supporting nature of Penn theatre was responsible for audience size and composition.
The extreme familiarity and comfort of theatre members led to the performance's
convivial atmosphere and the experiment's superficial rendering (matters certainly would
have been different in a professional performance, with a more heterogonous audience).
Overall, Gamma Rays, as a student production, served as a forum for the confirmation
and display of social identity among the students. This actuality forged the general
character and directionality of the suggestions. Finally, the fact that both the performers
and spectators were students led to the generation of a unique actor-audience dynamic,
one that was brazen, contentious, and, ultimately, counter-productive.

THE ACTORS
On one level, acting is a fairly simple concept: to act as another, be it human or
non-human. But on a deeper level, our understanding of it has not increased over the past

two millennia. How does one "act?" How is an individual able to effectively "replace"
her own psyche, whether for two hours or two years? Where does "actor" end and
"character" begin?
Much of the confusion surrounding acting is the result of a poor definition of
being - hardly a matter that can be discussed in five minutes. What is the relationship of
acting to being? How does one explain the relationship of actor to character without an
understanding of being? Is a true understanding of the relationship impossible?
Gamma Rays provides a unique window into this relationship. At this point, it
would be fruitless to discuss acting proper, which will be addressed later in the essay.
Instead, this section will sunnnarize the actor's perspectives on and experiences within
the experiment. All of them operated within the tradition of American realistic (or
Method) acting. Thus, their end-goal was to "be" the character. In interviews, one actor
valorized this goal saying that it was an amazing feat if "you could make someone who
knows you think you're someone else."
One of the problems with acting is that it demands an uncanny awareness of self;
even an impossible awareness of self. Mark Fortier sums up the problem when he writes,
"Because the unconscious is hidden from us, we are not who we are aware of being."

28

Various acting styles require more or less awareness and control of the self. Realistic
acting, with its conviction to erase all artifice, demands the collapse of the signifier and
signified - the actor becomes the character. It is the claim of realism that, once this is
accomplished, the door to identification will be opened. Identification is the ultimate goal
because it constitutes the highest form of art: the translation of art into the self.

Obviously, this is a relationship fraught with danger. Postmodernism has spent a
great deal of time investigating the ethics and politics of identity and relationships. Elin
Diamond, in her article "The Violence of 'We': Politicizing Identification,'' scrutinizes
the ethics ofrealistic theatre. I quote it here at length:
Plato would understand the definition of identification
offered by J. Laplanche and J.B. Pontalis in The Language

of Psychoanalysis because it confirms his worst fears: 'The
psychological process whereby a subject assimilates an
aspect,

property,

or attribute

of the

other and 1s

transformed, wholly or partially, after the model the other
provides. It is by means of a series of identifications that
the personality is constituted and specified' [J. Laplanche
and J.B. Pontalis, The Language of Psychoanalysis, trans.
Donald Nicholson-Smith (New York: W.W. Norton, 1973),
205]. Identification, then, is psychological, that is, partially
unconscious and not immediately accessible to rational
scrutiny; this alone makes it something to be feared. More
troubling, the subject takes on, takes in, features of the
other and is

'transformed,'

wholly

or partially, in

conformity to that model. This implies that the subject has
no prior identity; rather, identity is formed in the crucible
of identifications; the subject is 'specified,' distinguished
from all other subjects not by his immortal soul but by his

identifications, and these identifications stem not from
disciplined reason but from desire, what Plato calls a
'weakness in our nature' or a 'trick of illusion' ... Dramatic
realism produces precisely those conditions that allow for
the creation of a smugly self-identifying spectator/critic and
the creation in the late nineteenth century of an
aggressively

bourgeois

we ... The

lifelike

stage

sign

reinforces the epistemology of an objective world, for the
referent is not simply implied; it is reaffirmed in the
activity of reception. Which is to say, realism is more than
an interpretation of reality passing as reality; it prodnces
'reality' by positioning its spectators to recognize and
verify its truths. Naturalizing the relation between character
and actor, setting and world, realism's project is always
ideological, drawing spectators into identifications with its
coherent fictions. It is through such identifications that
realism surreptitiously reinforces (even if it argues with)
the social arrangements of the society it claims to mirror.

29

Her argument is especially relevant to the Gamma Rays experiment because the
actors performed under the rnbric of realism. Their goal, again, was to produce
identification. They wanted the audience to feel what they were feeling. Moreover, this
task dictates a specific relationship to character which must be appreciated in order to
understand the reason the performances transpired as they did.

The actors viewed their characters, from the beginning, as real people. They had
lives of their own - dreams, hopes, fears, desires. As real people, they deserved all the
rights and privileges of any human being. For this reason, the actors came to see
themselves as "defenders" of the characters. All of the actors claimed to love their
characters. For some, like Ilana, this was because she saw herself in Tillie. For Sydney,
who did not identify with Nanny in any way, it was because she believed Nanny's life
was worth telling. Their deep affinity for the characters led to much of the conflict
between the actors and audience.
The actors worked diligently to stay "in character" because to be "pulled out"
meant failure. In their minds, it also meant that the audience could not identify with them,
could not share their (the actor's and the character's) pain. In one interview, Annie spoke
of the presentation of her own pain. She stated that she used outside, personal conflicts to
enrich her character with the hope that it would increase the presence of the character,
drawing the audience in until they identified with her.
The actors also explained that they used the audience's vocality to gauge their
relative success in this matter. If the audience, for example, made ridiculous suggestions,
the actors concluded that they did not "have them." This explains their frustration and
dissatisfaction with the "nightmare" scene - the audience always talked through it, e.g.
Annie and Carly were not doing a good job acting. The actors frequently used "war"
imagery in describing their relationship to the audience.
Again, one of our guidelines of the performance was that the actors should only
enact suggestions they felt aesthetically viable. The actors, however, felt that the majority
of the audience's comments were 1idiculous and superficial. To them, this was incredibly

insulting and frustrating. For one thing. it obstructed them in their goal of "bringing the
characters to life." Moreover, the actors felt that their rehearsal process had been
particularly rigorous (it was). As such, they interpreted the audience's inane suggestions
as nothing shmi of utter disrespect for them as artists. At one point, the actors referred to
the play as their "baby." The maternal analogy testifies to the ferocity of their conviction.
After the performances, the actors described the experience as being "pricked by
pins." The continual onslaught of audience suggestions seemed to them malicious in
intent. Sydney said in her interview; "Why would they want to fuck us up?" Ilana felt that
the audience became so antagonistic at points that she was obligated to "throw the
audience a bone." While all the actors expressed at one time or another feeling pressured
by the audience, the others did not share this sentiment. Overall, the ordeal was so
stressful for the actors that I most intermissions and post-show meetings consoling the
actors, many of whom were crying.
In the end, however, the actors confidently believed that the audience could not
"win" against them. Despite the audience's effrontery, the actors held firm in their
conviction that, ultimately, the play's emotional intensity would quell the audience.
Annie spoke directly of this in her interview, stating that, in the final scene, they (the
actors) have won. She asserted that, at that point, the drama was so intense, so powerful
that no matter what absurd comments the audience might make, they could not faze the
actors. Interestingly, this statement betrays a disarticulation of goals. According to this,
their ultimate goal their own absorption in the fiction and, only secondarily, the
audience's. Still, because the actors viewed the first as the means to the second, this
ultimately accords with their perforn1ative intentions.

Other aspects of the experiment were abandoned by the actors. This was one of
the most insightful contributions of the data. The actors required a stable character to act.
This is of paramount importance. One of the questions of the experiment dealt with
whether or not the actors could stay "in character" if the audience could modify their
behavior. The answer is, no.
The actors confided in interviews that while they wanted to remain open to
character suggestions, it simply was not possible. Somewhere along the way, they said,
the possibility of changing the character was abandoned as it would "violate the integrity
of the play." The actors were willing to explore plot and other "external" suggestions (as
they characterized it), but they refused to alter their characters. This is partly based in
their "love" for the characters and their perceived goals in performing, but it has more to
do with the extreme difficulty of portraying a character that continually changes. Each
change in action necessitates a change in being. Thus, in order to maintain the actorcharacter boundary (even if this meant complete replacement), the actors needed to
operate on a stable character base.
This character base became so strong that the actors believed they could deviate
from it without severing if. For example, Ilana cited a situation in which she rendered a
line poorly. Yet she maintained that she "still felt like her [Tillie], but didn't do what she
would have done." In group interviews, the actors, as a group, espoused this belief,
saying that "if you mess up a line, that's okay. You're not messing up the character." But,
as any semiotician would point out, the character is the lines. At some point, then, the
actors' belief in the characters' reality successfully eclipsed the text itself.

Paula encapsulated this point when she explained that her primary challenge was
to fight the audience's conceptions of her character based on the text. In the dramatic text,
Janice serves as Tillie's school-antagonist. The audience clearly read this because, at
certain performances, when the lights came up on Paula-Janice, the audience boo-ed her.
One young woman even exclaimed, "Oh, Jesus." Paula said she felt it was her duty to her
character to change their minds about Janice. This goal was originally derived out of the
Stanislavskian system of objective-acting: Janice wants to win the science fair.
Accordingly, Paula has to convince the (real) audience that her project is the best. But in
describing the experience, Paula said that she felt she had to "fight" the audience's
textual conceptions of Janice. For Paula, Janice existed beyond the text. She wanted the
audience to believe as she believed.
Despite their commitment to the characters as real people, the actors still
acknowledged a boundary between themselves and the characters. While their ultimate
goal was to abolish this distinction, they realized that their relationship waxed and waned.
They seemed to apprehend it almost as a percentage: "more me, but still her." This would
seem to indicate that the boundary was fluid, but, in discussing the efforts of the audience
to "mess them up" (as they characterized it), they said that some comments were directed
to the character and some to the actor. Paula stated that she felt the audience directed
suggestions to Janice to mess Paula up.
This actually increased solidarity among the actors. Because they were all
negotiating the boundary between the self and the "real" character, the actors forged a
striking camaraderie. Both Sydney and Ilana said, in personal conversation, that they
would become angry when a spectator's suggestion ridiculed another actor. One

particularly callous spectator suggested to Annie during the "nightmare" scene, "Try
projecting." Sydney later informed me that she had wanted to run out and punch the
spectator. "Disrespectful" suggestions only increased the actors' unity and furthered them
in their purpose to "win over" the unruly audience, according to their "realistic agenda."
In the end, the actors said that a large measure of their devotion came from the
fact that it was their life onstage. Throughout each performance, even when the actors
successfully "became" the characters, according to their own definitions, they were
always aware of their own selves. Annie, Ilana, Sydney, Carly, and Paula were all
onstage, too. The audience was not just engaging with a fiction, but with a reality as well.
The actors' uncanny devotion to their characters, even to a point beyond the text, was
always rooted in their own selves.
Thus, Annie infused Beatrice with aspects of herself, just as she took on aspects
of Beatrice to play her. The relationship was a -two-way street Carly remarked in
interviews that she caught herself talking like Ruth in the real world. Ruth had become
such a part of who she was that the theatrical frame could no longer contain her. Yet
simultaneously, Aunie explained that, even when she was unsuccessful in channeling
Beatrice, the audience still saw Beatrice. She speculated that it was because the audience
was still reading her, which was effectively half of Beatrice.
This raises an interesting contradiction. In Annie's case, the frame itself generated
the character, but in Carly's case, just the opposite occurred - the frame could not contain
the character. Where, then, is character located? Does it belong solely to the actor?
Neither Annie nor Carly could limit her character. For Annie, character was assumed

when it should not have been (she wasn't acting like Beatrice). For Carly, it invaded her
real life, and she found herself acting like Ruth even when she did not mean to.
Where does the actor end and the character begin?

AN IDEA
Theatre is the art of acting like another. This other can be sentient or inanimate,
but it is different from the self. Acting, of course, involves action. Otherwise, the person
is not acting. She may be performing (a wider category), hut she is not acting. Defined in
this way, character is the action another executes. In practical terms, it is the lines and
actions of a play, which, together with other lines, actions, and "events," constitute a
story.
What is commonly assumed with acting, however, is a relation to being. Many
theorists have defined acting as being another. It is not. It is merely acting as another.
Theatre then, redefined, is the art of acting-being. It is the forum for the evaluation of the
relationship between acting and being. According to this definition, theatre requires a
spectator, but acting does not.
The beginning of acting is alteration of action or behavior. Anyone can do this;
think of describing someone's behavior as "out of character." We do this because we, as
humans, always assume a relationship between action and being. There are beings which
act and beings which do not act. Flowers do not "act." They grow and develop, but they
do not behave. Other beings, however, can and do act. These are fauna, and what is
unique about fauna is that we humans assume a relationship between the fauna's action
and being. Whether or not this is scientifically or philosophically true is irrelevant. What
matters is that we believe it to be so.

As humans, we designate a certain level of action-complexity as "consciousness."
Certain beings have it, others do not. So, to use a few examples, we might say that an
amoeba behaves like an amoeba. Its action extends from its being. On the other hand, to
see a cow neighing like a horse would be strange indeed. A horse acts like a horse, and a
cow acts like a cow. Even small children can elicit the distinction. But the crux of the
matter is that we, rightly or wrongly, assume some sort of intrinsic relationship between
being and action .. And consciousness refers to a certain level of complexity in this
dynamic - conscious beings are relatively "harder to predict."
We perform the same operation with our fellow human beings. When
consciousness comes into play, however, there is an increased assumption of action-being
relation. Each human being is born capable of a diverse range of actions and behaviors.
Gradually, these behaviors are narrowed by culture. Children learn to act a certain way in
a given situation. One can envision this process as a furmel - the older we get, the fewer
actions we employ. Culture is the primary determinant of "ranges of action." Other
determinants are ethnicity, class, nationality, race, gender, religious orientation, age, etc.
Accordingly, these action-being associations carry a heavy ethical weight. People
are judged by their behavior, and assumptions are then made about their character, their
being. These assumptions can be valid or invalid, but either way, they are dangerous.
Assumptions concerning the relation of action to being led to the development of racist
ideologies, for instance. People assumed (and still do, regrettably) that one can tell certain
things about an individual based on the color of her skin. While the operation is one
essential to our survival (the ability to recognize an active being is paramount to staying
alive), the conclusions we draw are our own responsibility.

Within this framework, theatre functions as a site for the exploration and iteration
of the action-being dynamic. Theatre, as the art of acting and/or being like another,
challenges our assumptions about the intrinsicness of the relationship. Theatre as such is
an ideological institution. As a forum for the investigation and study of action-being
relations, it invariably produces ideologies about those relations. These ideologies can be
either approved or disapproved by culture, society, governments or political organs and
the like, but, in this sense, theatre is inherently political.
To clarify, hmnans assume a link between the action of a sentient being and the
being of that being. Consequently, humans form conclusions about certain action-being
relationships. A good way to think of this is in terms of stereotypes or social roles. For
example, certain behaviors are characterized as "motherly." Other behaviors are defined
in terms of gender: masculine or feminine. These action-being relationships structure
ideologies that penneate society. There are many sites which produce such ideologies:
the home, the school, the workplace, etc. Yet theater fi.mctions as a unique site of
production in that it is the one place where the action-being dynamic is systematically
investigated. This is theatre's primary, but not only, societal function.

For example, theatre is an economic entity and a source of pleasure. But theatre's
primary purpose in society is to explore the action-being dynamic. It accomplishes this
through framing. Imagine a child's first introduction to the theater. The child sees people
acting onstage, performing and behaving in certain ways. But the child does not yet know
that the person onstage might be lying. We learn, within our respective cultures, that
certain spaces, certain frames, can dist01i the acting-being dynamic. In such a frame, a
young man may act like an old man, or a virgin may act like a mother.

This is the source of theatre's representative power. Yet, contrary to the
arguments of many theorists, theatre does not always signify. 30 Signification is not
inherent to theatre. It is inherent to the theatrical frame (wherever that might be: a stage, a
professional theatre, a high school auditorium, around a campfire), but it is not inherent
to acting. We in the West have a tendency to over-signify theatre. To use Peirce's famous
example of the drunkard and the Salvation Anny, the drunkard cannot be said to signify
anything innately. His signification is imposed. Because he does not attempt to act, he
cannot be said to signify (though acting is not always signification). In other words,
neither he, nor perhaps some members of the audience, believe he is creating a "fiction."
Yet in another sense, he cannot help but signify by standing onstage, within the theatrical
frame. Thus, the only reason the drunkard signifies is because of the frame, which is
culturally inscribed. 31
This tendency to over-signify riddles performance theory. Theorists such as
Patrice Pavis have pondered over the signification of a chair onstage.

32

"How does the

chair signify?" they ask. They assume that the chair is simultaneously its real self and
another chair. It refers to another chait, somewhere, some-when else; or perhaps it refers
to all chairs. But neither is the case. Ultimately, the chair does not signify. Signification is
forced upon it by the spectator, by the semiotician. The aforementioned child does not
read it as a different chair. Rather, it is taught that it should consider it as such. It
achieves this signification through belief in disbelief. We learn that we should not "trust"
a chair onstage.
Because human beings arc able to dissemble onstage, we assume that objects can
accomplish this feat as well. But this it not the case. Human beings signify through their

action. An actor onstage acts as someone else. Yet once a space is associated with this
activity on a regular basis, it becomes a site of semblance. Onstage, Bill does not act like
himself; he acts like an eighty-year-old man. Consequently, we designate the space as the
source of the signification, and not the human actor. Because the actor has "feigned" in
that space, the space becomes endowed with certain properties. Thus, a chair is "more
thm1 a singular chair" onstage. But this is ridiculous. It is a blatant misunderstanding of
the nature of theatre.
Again, theatre is the art of acting-being alteration. Up to this point, we have only
considered the alteration of action. But all action is linked to being in our minds. This
association generates character in its typical understanding. This is also· the source ·of
theatre's phenomenological rotundity. 33 Because a character "acts" (tlrrough lines and
actions 1:ontained in the written dramatic text), we subconsciously grant it a being. Thus,
we talk of Hamlet as a being. Hamlet is different from Othello. How? Because he does
things that Othello would not do.
Yet to spealc of Hamlet as an "is," as a being, is incorrect. He does not exist, he
only acts. The same is true of Othello. He is only a set of recorded actions. Yet we grant
him a being because we, as humans, caffilot comfortably disassociate acting from being.
This is, in effect, how history "comes alive." It is also how Olivier's Hamlet is different
from Gielgud's Hamlet. The actor becomes the manifestation of the character's perceived
. 34
hezng.

Because the character does not truly exist, it requires a human form to become
ontologically present. The human actor stands in for fue character's being. Once this yoke

is taken up, however, things become much more complicated. The specific relation of
action to being, beyond the assumption of a relation, varies according to acting tradition.
For instance, Method acting strives toward a collapse of the signifier and referent.
Stanislavsky wanted to confound the actor's being with the character's being. The result
would be that the audience would see, and only see, the character. The actor functioned
solely as a medium. To accomplish this, Stanislavsky developed an elaborate training
system. The actor begins her training by learning/acquiring the character's action (her
lines and actions in the script). Then, through a complicated series of exercises, the actor
works to effectively erase her own being and replace it with the character's. This is why
"thinking like the character" is the end-goal in realistic acting. It dissolves the signifier
and referent, effectively re-uniting disassociated action and being (the character is, in a
way, lacking its being). What I mean by this is that a young man should work so hard to
portray an old man that the actions which he is performing onstage (those of an old man)
ultimately fit with the being. This is why celebrity poses such a problem to realistic
acting. 35 The audience's "heavy" awareness of the actor's being obscures the actionbeing union, making its achievement extremely difficult. This, too, illustrates that
realistic acting is the tradition of the reconciliation of action and being.
Brechtian acting

strives

for just the opposite.

The

goal

of Brecht's

Verfremdungseffekt is to force the spectator to hold a dual consciousness in her mind: she

should see both the character and the actor. The actor executes the actions of the
character, but does not become the character. At all times, the actor should retain her
individual identity. The audience should be cognizant that the actions belong to another,
truly fictional being (the character), but that they are being manifested by a separate, real

being (the actor). In this way, Method acting and Brechtian epic theatre stand at opposite
poles of the acting-being dynamic. The former seeks the collapse of the signifier-referent
and the reunification of action and being (one cannot discern that it is a real actor
executing the actions of a fictional being), while the latter seeks to maintain the boundary
between action and being with the result that the spectator is aware of two beings and one
set of actions.
Furthermore, the action-being dynamic is the means by which a spectator
recognizes "bad acting." Actors onstage always perform the actions of the character in
scripted American theatre. Not to perform the actions of a play is not to perform the play.
Being, on the other hand, is "optional."
Needless to say, our incessant need to categorize action in terms of being has
made us rather adept at it. Thus, when someone is performing an action that does not
coincide with our notion of their being, we suspect dissemblance. The actor is dubbed a
"bad actor" because the alien actions are clearly apparent. In realistic acting, an actor is
considered successful if she can convince us that no disparity exists between the action
and the being.
One must be aware, however, that this feat is accomplished through several means
- alteration of action, the use of make-up, the presence of a frame, etc. Depending on the
complexity of the action-being relationship, an actor might use any number of these
means. For example, if I am relating a story to a friend and want to imitate another
friend's reaction within that story, I merely have to alter my behavior to effect this
imitation. I behave as my friend did. It is not necessary for me to alter my being because
the frame of the story does not demand it; the friend I am speaking to should not forget

that I am me and instead believe that I am my friend. If, however, I do wish to convince
her that I am actually our mutual friend, I must go to greater lengths to reconcile the
action-being disparity. I still act like him, mimicking his voice and movement, but, in
order to accomplish this greater feat, I must also change my appearance: I must dress like
him, perhaps dye my hair. Thus, the exact nature of the action-being dynamic depends on
the frame and the intentions of the actor (or the aesthetic tradition to which she
subscribes).
This, then, is how Annie can be perceived as Beatrice when she is not acting like
Beatrice. The audience was over-signifying her. They were aware of the theatrical frame,
set up by the purchasing of tickets, the distribution of programs, etc. Because of the
frame, they assumed that Annie was at all times attempting to portray Beatrice. Thus,
when Annie did not act like Beatrice, but acted like herself, they read it as her acting like
Beatrice. They might have thought in this instance that she was a bad actor, that she was
acting "poorly," but they still read her actions as a signification because of the frame.
This also explains why Carly found herself acting like Ruth in everyday life. She
had effectively spent the last six weeks working to reduce the distance between Ruth's
actions and her (Carly's) being, so that, according to Method acting and the standards of
American realism, she would be esteemed a "good" actor. Gradually, the character's
actions began to intrude into her own actions. Carly never confessed believing that she
was Ruth or thought like Ruth outside of the play. This would have been especially
extreme. Nevertheless, she became so comfortable with Ruth's actions that she began to
confuse Ruth's actions with her own: she would talk like Ruth, walk like Ruth, etc. In

this case, the frame played no role, and Carly's experience exemplifies the limits of frame
analysis.
However, it must be understood that not all occurrences onstage are read by the
audience as pertaining to the realm of the fiction. Thus, as Bert States points out, certain
beings (whether active or not) inherently resist signification. Dogs bark, babies cries, and
props break. 36 Keir Elam nicely summarizes this point when he writes,
During the performance, not only may various kinds of
extratextual "noise" arise, having to be ignored or tolerated
(late arrivals, malfunctioning of equipment and, within
limits, the forgetting of lines by actors), but certain licensed
activities not contributory to the representation proper may
take place on stage and will be duly discounted by the
spectator (the entry and exit of stagehands, for example, in
set changes). It is not that the excluded events - such as
audience activity - have no semiotic value (it does make a
difference if one is allowed to see the stage hands or if the
entire audience is noisily eating popcorn), but that they are
understood as belonging on a different level of action. 37
To provide yet another illustration, ifI am walking outside, and a man beside me
starts to convulse, if he is a good enough actor, I cannot tell if he is acting or truly
convulsing. If a disparity is easily recognizable in the action-being relationship, then I
know he is acting. But ifhe is "really" convulsing, or successfully feigning convulsing by
uniting action and being, I have no way of distinguishing between the two. 38 A frame has

no bearing on theatre or acting proper. It merely serves to infonn us that in a certain
space, the action-being dynamic may be called into question. There are even theatrical
performers and performances which do not alter the action-being dynamic, but which
feign alteration.
Consider the case of Spalding Gray. 39 Gray, who wrote and performed his own
plays, is frequently utilized in postmodern discussions of theatre. "Who is Spalding
Gray?" postmodernists ask. How can Spalding Gray act himself? Is he the author, the
character, the actor? The truth of the matter is that Spalding Gray never acted in his
monologues. It is yet another case of a frame's over-signification, a fact which Spalding
Gray exploited to aesthetic effect. Spalding Gray did not act in the true sense of the
theatrical definition. Even though his behavior was altered by performing, it was still
behavior that could logically be linked to his being. Spectators never assumed that Gray
was playing Hamlet. He was playing himself. And in this way, he was not acting at all.
He wrote a play, and read it onstage. The art of the performance lay in the audience's
readiness to over-signify the experience.
This last example finally leads us back to theatre's function in society as a site for
the production of ideology. In her article, "Presenting and Re-Presenting the Self: From
Not-Acting to Acting in African Performance," Frances Harding discusses the actoraudience relationship in certain parts of Africa. Her reading of the African performances
paints a picture of an acting framework somewhat similar to the one I am here proposing,
though her appeal to theatre· s importance is somewhat misguided. 40 What is paramount
is that each acting style, each theatre, must be understood within its own culture. It must
be appreciated as an isolated ideological institution, yet one which exerts considerable

influence on the society. Theatre confirms or rejects stereotypes. Theatre convinces us
that certain action-being relations are correct or incorrect. Theatre influences our
understanding ofrepresentation at its very core.
This, in my opinion, is why the Gamma Rays audiences rejected the experiment.
The structure of the experiment so complicated the action-being dynamic that, ultimately,
the audience could not navigate the boundary. At times, they were "pulled into" the play,
while at others they maintained a critical distance and saw the actors only as actors.
Because, in essence, the experiment asked the audience to play with the action-being
relationship, it resulted in a complete abandonment of the experiment. While all
performances began with the audience seeking to affect the actors and/or the aesthetic,
the audience quickly turned to more social concerns. I believe their focus on the social
experience was the result of an inability to reconcile the action-being relationship, to stay
"involved" in the action-being negotiation. If they could change the play, how could they
read it? The audience could not read and write the performance simultaneously. The task
was too difficult, and they averted their attention to the social aspect of the performance.
The actors, in tum, rejected the audience because of the audience's rejection of
the experiment-performance. To be sure, the actors contributed to the disruption of the
communicative circuit by refosing to enact suggestions which altered their respective
characters. They denied the audience the ability to change the core of theatrical art. Yet,
who can blame them? It proved too difficult for them to signify a being that was
constantly being re-defined in its action.
Thus, the experiment was a failure. The actors and audience could not engage in a
positive dialogue and together rewrite the performance text. Instead, the performance, as

one spectator described it, "made a good play with great actors into an average one with
people shouting." Nevertheless, the experiment has contributed to onr understanding of
theatre and its function in society. In this regard, and this regard only, it was successfol.
In conclusion, this definition of theatre and acting is relative. I apply it only to
theatre in America. Cultmally, performance and theatre vary to such a degree that I,
unlike many theorists, hesitate to pose a "theory" which explains everything. As such,
each perfonnance must be analyzed within its own cultural and aesthetic context. As the
producers and interpreters of meaning operate within a culture-specific ideological
framework, one must, in theatre anthropology, study all aspects of the performance.
Up to the present, performance theorists have studied theatre's relationship to
society without clearly defining society.

Obviously, this is an enormous problem.

Because many performance theorists are anthropologists, they assume a community
model ( Gemeinschaft), an assumption that colors all of their interpretations about theatre
and performance. Performance is discussed in terms of the Self!Other dialectic, of "more
real" and "less real," and of its similarity to ritual, to name a few. Frankly, I do not
believe that theatre is similar to ritual. One can draw parallels if one so wishes, but ritual
and theatre serve wholly distinct functions in society.
It is this word, society, which I think has not received enough attention m

performance anthropology. The truth of the matter is that the performance metaphor and
its close association to gemeinschaji thinking effectively ignore the majority of theatrical
events. For most people in most countries of the world, theatre occurs in society. It is
linked (for better or worse) with status, economics, class, ethnicity, religion, gender,

nationality, and taste, to cite only a handful of discriminatory categories. As Janet Wolff
writes,

[T]he nature of the audience is determined, amongst other
things, by the nature and practice of culture in general in
that society ... by the general ideology of that society and of
its subdivisions, and by the general mode of production and
relations of production of that society. In other words, the
possibility for the reception of radical or negative culture is
itself determined by the economic base, and by the extent
and type of autonomy accorded to general and aesthetic
ideology by the stage of development of that society. 41
At the beginning of this essay, I wrote of the importance of context in analysis. In
any study of the production and interpretation of meaning, one must account for the
context in which the exchange occurs. I offer this final analysis of the Gamma Rays
experiment as proof of the importance of the Gesellschafl model.
Gamma Rays depicts a family of low-economic status facing numemus social

challenges. Several of them also struggle with mental conditions and disabilities. To
reiterate, this play was presented to students at an Ivy League university where the
majority of arc wealthy, well-educated, and hail from suburbs or rich neighborhoods. I
contend that these differences directly contributed to the audience's difficulty in
navigating the action-being relationship.
In effect, the play produced an ideology about the action-being dynamic which
the Ivy League students rejected. They wrote that they had difficulty believing the

characters because they had never encountered such people before in real life. When
asked whether or not they identified with any of the characters, spectators responded,
"No - too dysfunctional." "No. I'm not particularly sure. I've never been close to anyone
in such a situation." "No - they were all too crazy." "No, they seemed like caricatures
more than real people." "Mostly with Matilda, but this play is pretty far removed from
my actual life experiences." "Sort of. .. but I think that the circumstances in the play were
more exaggerated than those in my life." "No - this family was very dysfunctional." and
"No, hopefully not." In realistic theatre, how does one comprehend the action-being
relationship of a human character if the spectator does not believe that such a characterbeing exists?

To summarize: for the most part, the audience felt the play was well-acted. They
were greatly frustrated by the actors' unwillingness to take up more of their suggestions,
yet their suggestions were directed more to the audience than to the play. The audience's
simplistic understanding of content and poor understanding of form resulted in superficial
suggestions that did not alter the play in any dramatic way. Consequently, the actors
rejected the audience's suggestions. While a few aesthetically-complex suggestions were
offered, the actors refused to enact them because they would performatively disrupt the
action-being dynamic.
Ultimately, the audience accepted the performance (the play), but rejected the
experiment. They could not successfully read and write the play at the same time.
Furthennore, they struggled to navigate the action-being dynamic in light of the
experiment and sociological differences.

The audience was never sure what to change about the productiou. It was easier
for them to either sit and watch the play or make jokes about it and use the opportunity to
reinforce social relations. In other words, the experiment and performance produced an
ideology which contradicted the student audience's understanding of action-being
relationships. In this light, the audience"s superficial suggestions can be interpreted as
attempts to "rectify" or even "disrupt" the characters' strange actions. When the audience
could not bring the alien characters under their control, they rejected the experiment. To
them, it had produced a "false" ideology.

A FINAL REMARK
At the beginning of this essay I announced that one of my goals with this project
was to provide performance theory with perfonnance data. Needless to say, not all of the
facets of the Gamma Rays performances could be investigated in this paper. Theatre is
simply too complex; there are too many questions.
Yet in acknowledgement of this, I have attempted with this project to provide data
which might be utilized in future research. Literally hundreds of questions remain
unanswered about theatre, and about this experiment in general. To list but a handful:
What is the effect of space on the production of meaning? How does an audience's
horizon of expectations affect a performance? How does gender influence the perceptual
process? and How does an actor psychologically manipulate her own psyche and
identity?
Moreover, theatre's complexity dictates a need for research across performances
and across cultures. I have attempted to devise a method for the capture of perfonnance
data which would allow for the review and re-evaluation of the material by other social

scientists. The problem which today plagues perfonnance theory is that the discipline
lacks concrete. verifiable data.
Thus, I humbly submit this project, its data and materials, to the scientific
connnunity at large for farther investigation, scrutiny, theorizing, and criticism. The data
should be made available to all interested parties on the condition that all materials are
safely returned and stored by the University of Pennsylvania Department of
Anthropology, and that all references are ethically cited. This is my formal statement that
my thesis and its data should be made available as a resource to foture anthropological
research.

REFERENCES CITED
1

Smith, Anna Deavere. (1992) Twilight: Los Angeles, 1992, New York: Anchor Books: 255.
Bennett, Susan. (1997) Theatre Audiences: A Theory (~/Production and Reception, New York: Routledge:
186.
3
Barthes, Roland. (1979) "Theatre and Signification," in Roland Barthes, "Barthes on Theatre," Theatre
Quarterly 9, 29-30.
4
Schechner, Richard. (2002) PerfOrmance Studies: An Introduction. New York: Routledge: 23.
5
De Marin is, Marco. (1993) The Semiotics of Performance. Bloomington: Indiana University Press: 159.
6
Bennett 1997: 8.
7
Eco, Umbetio. (1979) The Role (~fthe Reader: Explorations in the Semiotics Texts. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.
8
Bennett 1997: 23.
Y Turner, Victor. (1969) The Riwal Process: Structure and Anti-Structure. Chicago: Alpine Pub. Co.: 132.
10
Schechner, Richard. (1988) Petformance The01y. New York: Routledge: 61.
11
Copeland, Roger. (1990) "Presence of Mediation." TDR: The Drama Review. 34(4): 34.
12
Elam, Keir. (1980) Semiotics of"171eatre and Drama. New York: Methuen: 88-89.
13
Fisher, Judith W. (2003) "Audience Participation in Eighteenth-Century London Theatre," Audience
Participation: Essays on Inclusion in PerjOrmance. Westpo1i: Praeger Publishers: 59.
14
De Marinis 1993: 167.
15
Jauss, Hans Robert. (1982) Toward an Aesthetic of Reception. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press.
16
Pavis, Patrice. (1982) languages of the Stage: Essays in the Semiology of Theatre. New York:
Performing Arts Journal Publications: 23.
17
Clark, Herbert and Thomas Carlson. (1982) "Hearers and Speech Acts," Language. 58(2): 332.
18
Parker, Andrew and Eve Kosofsky Sedwick. (2004) "Introduction to Pcrformativity and Perfonnance," in
The Petformance Studies Reader. New York: Routledge: 172.
19
Carlson, Marvin. (1990) Theatre Semiotics: Signs of lfle. Bloomington: Indiana University Press: 15.
20
Bennett 1997: 118.
21
Naumann, Manfred. (1976) "Literary Production and Reception," New literary History. 8(1 ): 119.
2

21

Naumann 1976: 121.
Carlson 1990: 99-100.
24
Bennett 1997: 140.
25
Elam 1980: 96.
26
Bennett 1997: 84
27
Bennett 1997: xi.
2
~ Fortier, Mark. (2002) 77Jeory/Theatre: An Introduction.:Ne;w York: Routledge: 86.
29
Diamond, Elin. (1992) "The Violence of 'We': Politicizing Identification," Critical Theory and
Perfomwnce. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press: 391-3,
3
°
Fortier 2002: 22.
11
Carlson, Marvin. (1996) PerfOrmance: A Critical Introduction. New York: Routledge: 41.
32
F011ier 2002: 31.
33
States, Bert 0. (1992) "The Phenomenological Attitude," Critical Theory and Perfmmance. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press: 372.
34
States 1992: 373.
35
Quinn, Michael. (1990) "Celebrity and the Semiotics of Acting," New Theatre Quarterly. 6(22): 155-6.
36
States, Bert 0. (1985) Great Reckonings in Little Rooms: On the Phenomenology o,fTheater. Berkeley:
University of California Press: 31-3.
37
Elam 1980: 88-9.
38
Williams, Raymond. (1981) Culture. London: Fontana: 133.
39
Fortier 2002: 97.
40
Harding, Frances. (1999) "Presenting and Re-Presenting the Self: From Not-Acting to Acting in African
Performance," TDR: The Drama Review. 43(2): 119.
11
' Wolff, Janet. (1981) The Social Production o,/Art. London: Macmillan: 93-4.
23

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

APPENDIX A
THE EFFECT OF GAMMA RAYS
ON MAN-IN-THE-MOON MARIGOLDS
By Paul Zindel
(The lights go down slowly as music creeps in - a theme for lost children, the near
misbegotten. From the blachiess TILLIE'S VOICE speaks against the music.)
TILLIE'S VOICE: He told me to look at my hand, for a part ofit came from a star that
exploded too long ago to imagine. This part of me was formed from a tongue of fire
that screamed through the heavens until there was our sun. And this part of me - this
tiny part of me - was on the sun when it itself exploded and whirled in a great storm
until the planets came to be. (Lights start in.) And this small part of me was then a
whisper of the earth. When there was life, perhaps this part of me got lost in a fem
that was crushed and covered until it was coal. And then it was a diamond millions of
years later - it must have been a diamond as beautiful as the star from which it had
first come.
TILLIE: (Taking over from recorded voice.) Or perhaps this part of me became lost in a
terrible beast, or became part of a huge bird that flew above the primeval swamps.
And he said this thing was so small- this part ofme was so small it couldn't be seen
- but it was there from the beginning of the world. And he called this bit of me an
atom. And when he wrote the word, I fell in love with it. Atom. Atom. What a
beautiful word.
(The phone rings.)
BEATRICE: (Off stage.) Will you get that please? (The phone rings again before
BEATRICE appears in her bathrobe from the kitchen.) No help 1 Never any help! (She
answers the phone.) Hello? Yes it is. Who is this? .. .! hope there hasn't been any
trouble at school. .. Oh, she's always been like that. She hardly says a word around
here, either. I always say some people were born to speak and others born to
listen ... You know I've been meaning to call you to thank you for that lovely rabbit
you gave Matilda. She and I just adore it and it's gotten so big ... Well, it certainly was
thoughtful. Mr. Goodman, I don't mean to change the subject but aren't you that
delightful young man Tillie said hello to a couple of months back at the A & P? You
were by the lobster tank and I was near the frozen foods? That delightful and
handsome young man?...Why, I would very much indeed use the expression
handsome. Yes, and ... Well, I encourage her at every opportunity at home. Did she
say I didn't? Both my daughters have their own desks and I put 75-watt bulbs right
near them ... Yes ... Yes .. .I think those tests are very much overrated, anyway, Mr.
Goodman ... Well, believe me she's nothing like that around this house ... Now I don't
want you to think I don't appreciate what you're trying to do, Mr. Goodman, but I'm
afraid it's simply useless. I've tried just everything, but she isn't a pretty girl - I
mean, let's be frank about it - she's going to have her problems. Are you married,
Mr. Goodman? Oh, that's too bad. I don't know what's the matter with women today

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

letting a handsome young man like you get away ... Well, some days she just doesn't
feel like going to school. You just said how bright she is, and I'm really afraid to put
too much of a strain on her after what happened to her sister. You know, too much
strain is the worst thing in this modem world, Mr. Goodman, and I can't afford to
have another convulsive on my hands, now can IO But don't you worry about Matilda.
There will be some place for her in this world. And, like I said, some were born to
speak and others just to listen ... and do call again, Mr. Goodman. It's been a tme
pleasure speaking with you. Goodbye.
(BEATRICE hangs up the phone and advances into the main room. T7,e lights come up.)
BEATRICE: Matilda, that wasn't very nice of you to tell them I was forcibly detaining
you from school. Why, the way that Mr. Goodman spoke, he must think I'm running
a concentration camp. Do you have any idea how embarrassing it is to be accused of
running a concentration camp for your own children? Well, it isn't embarrassing at
all. That school of yours is forty years behind the times anyway, and believe me you
learn more around here than that ugly Mr. Goodman can teach you! You !mow, I
really feel sorry for him. I never saw a man with a more effeminate face in my life.
When I saw you talking to him by the lobster tarik I said to myself, "Good Lord, for a
science teacher my poor girl has got herself a Hebrew hermaphrodite." Of course,
he's not as bad as Miss Hanley. The idea of letting her teach girl's gym is staggering.
And you have to place me in the embarrassing position of giving them a reason to call
me at eight-thirty in the morning, no less.
TILLIE: I didn't say anything.
BEATRICE: What do you tell them when they want to know why you stay home once
in a while?
TILLIE: I tell them I'm sick.
BEATRICE: Oh, you're sick all right, the exact nature of the illness not fully realized,
but you're sick all right. Any daughter that would tum her mother in as administrator
of a concentration camp has got be suffering from something very peculiar.
TILLIE: Can I go in today, Mother?
BEATRICE: You'll go in, all right.
TILLIE: Mr. Goodman said he was going to do an experiment BEATRICE: Why, he looks like the kind that would do his experimenting after
sundown.
TILLIE: On radioactivity BEATRICE: On radioactivity? That's all that high school needs!
TILLIE: He's going to bring in the cloud chamberBEATRICE: Why, what an outstanding event. If you had warned me yesterday I
would've gotten all dressed to kill and gone with you today. I love seeing cloud
chambers being brought in.
TILLIE: You can actually sccBEATRICE: You're giving me a headache.
TILLIE: Please?
BEATRICE: No, my dear, the fortress of knowledge is not going to be blessed with your
presence today. I have a good number of exciting duties for you to take care of, not
the least of which is rabbit droppings.
TILLIE: Oh, Mother, please ... I'll do it after school.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE: If we wait a minnte longer this house is going to ferment. I found rabbit
droppings in my bedroom even.
TILLIE: I could do it after Mr. Goodman's class. I'll say I'm ill and ask for a sick pass.
BEATRICE: Do you want me to chloroform that thing right this minute?
TILLIE: No!
BEATRICE: Then shut up.
(RUTH comes to the top of the stairs. She is dressed for school, and though her clothes
are simple she gives the impression of being slightly strange. Her hair isn't quite
combed, her sweater doesn't quite_fit, etc.)
RUTH: Do you have Devil's Kiss down there?
BEATRICE: It's in the bathroom cabinet.
(RUTH comes downstairs ancl goes to the bathroom door, located under the stairs. She
flings it open ancl rummages in the cabinet.)
RUTH: There's so much junk in here it's driving me crazy.
BEATRICE: Maybe it's in my purse .. .Ifyou don't hurry up you'll be late for school.
RUTH: Well, I couldn't very well go in without Devil's Kiss, now could I?
BEATRICE: Doesn't anyone go to school these days without that all over their lips?
RUTH: (Finding the lipstick.) Nobody I know, except Tillie, that is. And if she had a
little lipstick on I'll bet they wouldn't have laughed at her so much yesterday.
BEATRICE: Why were they laughing?
RUTH: The assembly. Didn't she tell you about the assembly?
BEATRICE: Ruth, you didn't tell me she was in an assembly.
RUTH: Well, I just thought of it right now. How could I tell you anything until I think of
it - did you ever stop to consider that? Some crummy science assembly.
BEATRICE: (To TILLIE) What is she talking about 7
RUTH: I thought she'd tell the whole world. Imagine, right in front of the assembly, with
everybody laughing at her.
BEATRICE: Will you be quiet, Ruth? Why were they laughing at you?
TILLIE: I don't know.
RUTH: You don't know? My heavens, she was a sight. She had that old jumper on - the
faded one with that low collar - and a raggy slip that showed all over and her hair
looked like she was struck by lightning.
BEATRICE: You're exaggerating ...
RUTH: She was cranking this model of something TILLIE: The atom.
RUTH: This model of the atom ... you know, it had this crank and a long tower so that
when you turned it, these little colored balls went spinning around like crazy. And
there was Tillie, cranking away, looking weird as a coot ... that old jumper with the
raggy slip and the lightning hair ... cranking away while some boy with glasses was
reading this stupid speech ... and everybody burst into laughter until the teachers
yelled at them. And all day long, the kids kept coming up to me saying, "Is that really
your sister? How can you bear it?" And you know, Chris Bums says to me - "She
looks like the one that went to the looney doctors." I could have kissed him there and
then.
BEATRICE: (Taking a backscratcher.) Matilda, if you can't get yourself dressed
properly before going to school, you·re never going to go again. I don't like the idea

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

of everybody laughing at you, because when they laugh at you they're laughing at
me. And I don't want you cranking any more ... atoms.
RUTH: (Putting the lipstick back in BEATRICE 's bag.) You're almost out of Devil's Kiss.
BEATRICE: If you didn't put so much on it would last longer.
RUTH: Who was that calling?
BEATRICE: Matilda turned me in to the Gestapo.
RUTH: Can I earn a cigarette this morning?
BEATRICE: Why not? (BEATRICE offers her the backscratcher along with a cigarette.)
RUTH: Was it Mr. Goodman?
BEA TRICE: Who?
RUTH: (Lighting the cigarette.) The call this morning. Was it Mr. Goodman?
BEATRICE: Yes.
RUTH: (Using the backscratcher on BEATRICE, who squirms with ecstasy.) I figured it
would be.
BEATRICE: A little higher, please.
RUTH: There?
BEATRICE: Yes, there .. .Why did you figure it would be Mr. Goodman?
RUTH: Well, he called me out of sewing elass yesterday - I remember because my
blouse wasn't all buttoned - and he wanted to know why Tillie's out of school so
much.
BEATRICE: Lower. A little lower. .. And what did you tell him?
RUTH: I wish you'd go back to Kools. I liked Kools better.
TILLIE: ( Gravely concerned.) What did you tell him?
RUTH: I told him you were ill, and he wanted to know what kind, so I told him you had
leprosy.
TILLIE: You didn't!
RUTH: You should have seen his face. He was so cute. And I told him you had
1ingworm and gangrene.
BEATRICE: What did he say?
RUTH: And I told him you had what Mother's last patient had ... whatchamacallit?
BEATRICE: Psoriasis?
RUTH: Yeah. Something like that.
TILLIE: Tell me you didn't, Ruth!
RUTH: OK. I didn't ... But I really did.
BEA TRICE: He knew you were joking.
RUTH: And then I told him to go look up the history and then he'd find out. Whenever
they go look up the history then they don't bother me anymore 'cause they think I'm
crazy.
BEATRICE: RuthRUTH: And I told him the disease you had was fatal and that there wasn't much hope for
you.
BEATRICE: What kind of history is it?
RUTH: Just a little folder with the story of our lives in it, that's all.
BEATRICE: How did you ever see it?

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

RUTH: I read the whole thing last term when Miss Hanley dragged me into the record
room because I didn't want to climb the ropes in gym and I told her my skull was
growmg.
BEATRICE: A little lower, please.
RUTH: Lower! Higher' I wish you'd make up your mind. If you'd switch back to Kools
it might be worth it, but ugh! these are awful. You know, I really did think my skull
was growing. Either that or a tumor. So she dragged me out of gym class, and she
thought I couldn't read upside down while she was sitting opposite me with the
history. But I could.
BEATRICE: What does it say?
RUTH: Oh, it says you're divorced and that I went crazy ... and my father took a heart
attack at Star Lake ... and now you're a widow BEATRICE: (Referring to the backscratching.) That's it! Hold it right there! Aaah!
RUTH: And it says that I exaggerate and tell stories and that I'm afraid of death and
have nightmares ... and all that stuff.
BEATRICE: And what else does it say?
RUTH: I can't remember everything you know. Remember this, remember that. ..
remember this, that. ..
( Go to dark. Music in.)
TILLIE'S VOICE: Today I saw it. Behind the glass a white cloud began to form. He
placed a small piece of metal in the center of the chamber and-we waited until I saw
the first one - a trace of smoke that came from nowhere and then disappeared. And
then another. .. and another, until I knew it was coming from the metal. They looked
like water-sprays from a park fountain, and they went on and on for as long as I
watched. And he told me the fountain of smoke would come forth for a long time, and
if I had wanted to, I could have stayed there all my life and it would never have ended
- that fountain, so close I could have touched it. In front of my eyes, one part of the
world was becoming another. Atoms exploding, flinging off tiny bullets that caused
the fountain, atom after atom breaking down into something new. And no one could
stop the fountain. It would go on for millions of years - on and on, this fountain from
eternity.
(By the end of this speech, the lights are in to show TILLIE preparing boxes of dirt in
which to plant seeds. The rabbit (s in the cage near her, and BEATRICE is reading a
newspaper on the other side of the room. She is sipping coffee from a huge coffee
cup.)
BEA TRICE: I thought we had everything, but leave it to you to think of the one thing
we're missing ... (She reads from the newspaper.}Twenty-two acres in Prince's Bay.
Small pond. $6,000 ... That's cheap. I'd take a look at it if I had any money ... What
kind of seeds are they?
TILLIE: Marigolds. They've been exposed to cobalt-60.
BEATRICE: If there's one thing I've always wanted, it's been a living room planted
with marigolds that have been exposed to cobalt-60. While you're at it, why don't
you throw in a tomato patch in the bathroom?
TILLIE: Just let me keep them here for a week or so until they get started and then I'll
transplant them to the backyard.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE: (Reading again.) Four-family house. Six and a half and six and a half over
five and five. Eight garages. I could really do something with that. A nursing home ...
Don't think I'm not kicking myself that I didn't finish that real estate course. I should
have finished beauty school, too ... God, what I could do with eight garages ... (There
is a sound from beyond the curtained doorway. BEATRICE gestures in that direction.)
You know, I'm thinking of getting rid of that and making this place into something.
TILLIE: Yes.
BEA TRICE: I've been thinking about a tea shop. Have you noticed there aren't many of
them around anymore?
TILLIE: Yes.
BEATRICE:. And this is just the type of neighborhood where a good tea shop could
make a go of it. We'd have a good cheesecake. You've got to have a good
cheesecake ... (She calculates.) Eight times ten - well, eight times eight, if they're
falling down - that's sixty-four dollars a month from the garages alone .. .I swear
money makes money.
( There is a rustling at the curtains. Two thin and wrinkled hands push the curtains apart
slowly and then the ancientface ofNANNY appears. She negotiates her way through
the curtains. She is utterly wrinkled and dried, perhaps a century old. Time has lefi
her with a whisper of a smile - a smile from a soul ha/fdeparted. If one looked
closely, great cataracts could be seen on each eye, and it is certain that all that can
pierce her soundless prison are mere shadows from the outside world. She pervades
the room with age. NANNY supports herself by ajin,r-legged tubular frame which she
pushes along in front of her with a shuffling motion that reminds one of a ticking
clock. Inch by inch she advances into the room. TILLIE and BEATRICE continue
speaking, knowing that it will be minutes before she is close enough to know they are
there.)
BEATRICE: What is cobalt-60?
TILLIE: It's something that causes ... changes in seeds. Oh, Mother - he set the cloud
chamber up just for me and he told me about radioactivity and half-life and he got the
seeds for me.
BEATRICE: (Her attention still on the newspaper.) What does half-life mean 7 (NANNY
is well into the room as TILLIE replies.)
· TILLIE: (Reciting from memory.) The half-life of Polonium-210 is one hundred and
forty days. The half-life of Radiurn-226 is one thousand five hundred and ninety
years. The half-life of Uranium-238 is four and one-half billion years.
BEATRICE: (Putting away her newspaper.) Do you know you're giving me a
headache? (Then, in a loud, horribly saccharine voice, she speaks to NANNY as if she
were addressing a deaf year-old child.) LOOK WHO'S THERE! IT'S NANNY!
NANNY CAME ALL THE WAY OUT HERE BY HERSELF! I'm going to need a
cigarette for this. NANNY! YOU COME SIT DOWN AND WE'LL BE RIGHT
WITH HER! You know, sometimes I've got to laugh. I've got this on my hands and
all you're worried about is planting marigolds. I'VE GOT HOTSY WATER FOR
YOU, NANNY. WOULD YOU LIKE SOME HOTSY WATER AND HONEY?
(NANNY has seated herself at a table, smiling but oblivious to her environment.) I've
never seen it to fail. Every time I decide to have a cup of coffee I see that face at the
curtains. I wonder what she'd do ... (She holds the pot of boiling water.) .. .if I just

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

poured this right over her head. I'll be she wouldn't even notice it. NANNY'S
GOING TO GET JUST WHAT SHE NEEDS 1 (She.fills a cup for her and places a
honeyjar near her.) You know if someone told me when I was young that I'd end up
feeding honey to a zombie, I'd tell them they were crazy. SOMETHING WRONG,
NANNY? OH, DID I FORGET NANNY'S SPOON? MERCY! MERCY! I
FORGOT NANNY'S SPOON! (She gets a spoon and stands behind NANNY.) I'll
give you a spoon, Nanny, I'll give you a spoon. (She makes a motion behind
NANNY's back as if'she's going to smack her head with the spoon.) Matilda! Watch
me give Nanny her spoon. A SPOON FOR NANNY! (It manages to be slightly fimny
and TILLIE yields a laugh, along with her mother.) Fifty dollars a week. Fifty dollars.
I look at you, Nanny, and I wonder if it's worth it. I think I'd be better off driving a
cab. TAKE HONEY, NANNY. HONEY WITH HOTSY WATER! You should have
seen her daughter bring her here last week .. .! could have used you that day ... She
came in pretending she was Miss Career Woman of the Year. She said she was in real
estate and such a busy little woman, such a busy little woman - she just couldn't give
all the love and care and affection her little momsy needed anymore ... (Then, with a
great smile, she speaks right into NANNY 's uncomprehending face.) Nanny's quite a
little cross to bear, now aren't you, Nanny dear? But you're a little better than Mr.
Mayo was - with the tumor on his brain - or Miss Marion Minto with her cancer, or
Mr. Brougham ... what was his first name?
TILLIE: Alexander.
BEATRICE: Mr. Alexander Brougham with the worms in his legs. WHY, NANNY'S
QUITE SOME LITTLE GIRL, AREN'T YOU, NANNY? A GIRL DRINKING HER
HOTSY AND HONEY!. .. Cobalt-60. Ha! You take me for a fool, don't you?
TILLIE: No, Mother.
BEATRICE: Science, science, science! Don't they teach our misfits anything anymore?
Anything decent and meaningful and sensitive? Do you know what I'd be now if it
wasn't for this mud pool I got sucked into? I'd probably be a dancer. Miss Betty
Frank, The Best Dancer of the Class of 19 ... something. One minute I'm the best
dancer in school - smart as a whip - the head of the whole crowd! And the next
minute ... One mistake. That's how it starts. Marry the wrong man and before you
know it he's got you tied down with two stones aronnd your neck for the rest of your
life. When I was in that lousy high school I was one of the most respected kids you
ever saw. I used to wonder why people always said, "Why, just yesterday ... why, just
yesterday ... why, just yesterday ... " Before I knew what happened I lost my dancing
legs and got varicose legs. Beautiful varicose legs. Do you know, everything I ever
thought I'd be has exploded! NANNY, YOU HURRY UP WITH THAT HONEY!
Exploded! You know, I almost forgot about everything I was supposed to
be ... NANNY'S ALMOST FINISHED. ISN'T THAT WONDERFUL 9 She's ahnost
finished, all right. NANNY'S DAUGHTER IS COMING TO SEE YOU SOON.
WILL THAT MAKE NANNY HAPPY? The day Miss Career Woman of the Year
comes to visit again I think I'll drop dead. Nobody's too busy for anything they want
to do, don't you tell me. What kind of idiot do people take me for? NANNY,
YOU'RE SPILLING YOUR HOTSY 1 JESUS CHRIST! You know, I ought to kick
you right out and open that tea shop tomorrow. Oh, it's coming. I can feel it. And the
first thing I'll do is get rid of that rabbit.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

TILLIE: (Hardly listening.) Yes, Mother.
BEATRICE: You think I'm kidding?
TILLIE: No, I don't.
BEATRICE: You bet I'm not! (She rummages through some drawers in a chest.) I was
going to do this a month ago. (She holds up a small bottle.) Here it is. Here's a new
word for you. (She reads.) Trichloro ... methane. Do you know what that is, Matilda?
Well, it's chloroform! (She puts the bottle away.) I'm saving it for that Angora
manure machine of yours. Speaking of manure machines, IS NANNY READY TO
GO MAKE DUTY? (She starts helping NANNY out of the chair and props her up
with the tubular frame.) NANNY IS ALWAYS READY FOR DUTY, AREN'T
YOU NANNY? BECAUSE NANNY'S A GOODY-GOODY GIRL AND GOODYGOODY GIRLS ALWAYS GET GOODY-GOODY THINGS. GOD LOOKS OUT
FOR GOODY-GOODY GIRLS AND GIVES THEM HOTSY AND HONEY RIGHT, NANNY?
(BEATRICE sits down in the hall and watches NANNY make her way toward the bathroom.
There is a pause as the woman's shuffling continues. The lights go low on TILLIE,
NANNY becomes a silhouette, and the light remains on BEATRICE. She starts to read
the paper again, but the shuffling gets on her nerves and she flings the paper down.)
BEATRICE: Half-life! If you want to know what a half-life is, just ask me. You're
looking at the original half-life! I got stuck with one daughter with half a mind;
another one who's half a test tube; half a husband - a house half full of rabbit crap and half a corpse! That's what I call a half-life, Matilda! Me and cobalt-60! Two of
the biggest half-Ii/es you ever saw!
(The set goes dark. Ajler a few seconds, the sound of someone dialing a phone can be
heard. As the spot comes up on her, we see BEATRICE holding the phone and
struggling to get a cigarette.)
BEATRICE: (On the phone.) Hello - Mr. Goodman, please ... How would I know if
he's got a class? ... Hello, Mr. Goodman? Are you Mr. Goodman 7 ... Oh, I beg your
pardon, Miss Torgersen ... Yes, I'll wait. .. (She lights her cigarette.) Couldn't you
find him, Miss Torgersen? ... Oh! Excuse me, Mr. Goodman. How are you? ... l'IJ bet
you'll never guess who this is - it's Mrs. Hunsdorfer - remember the frozen foods?
(She laughs.) You know, Ruth told me she's your new secretary and I certainly think
that's a delight. You were paying so much attention to Matilda that I' II bet Ruth just
got jealous. She does things like that, you know. I hope she works hard for you,
although I can't imagine what kind of work Ruth could be doing in that great big
science office. She's a terrible snoop ... (She takes a pufl) Your attendance? Isn't that
charming. And the cut cards! Imagine. You trust her with ... why, I didn't know she
could type at all ... imagine. Well. .. I'll...Of course, too much work isn't good for
anyone, either. No wonder she's failing everything. I mean, I never knew a girl who
failed everything regardless of what they were suffering from .. .I suppose I should say
recovering from ... Well, it's abont the seeds you gave Matilda ... Well, she's had them
in the house for a week now and they're starting to grow. Now, she told me they had
been subjected to radioactivity, and I hear such terrible things about radioactivity that
I automatically associate radioactivity with sterility, and it positively horrifies me to
have those seeds right here in my living room. Couldn't she just grow plain maiigolds
like everyone else? (She takes a puff) Oh ... (Another big puff, forming a mushroom

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

cloud.) It does sound like an interesting project, but... (The biggest puff yet.) No, I
must admit that at this very moment I don't know what a mutation is ... (She laughs
uncomfortably.) Mr. Goodman ... Mr. Goodman! I don't want you to think I'm not
interested, but please spare me definitions over the phone. I' II go the library next
week and pick me out some little book on science and then I'll !mow all about
mutations ... No, you didn't insult me, but I just want you to know that I'm not
stupid ... I just thought prevention was better than a tragedy, Mr. Goodman. I mean,
Matilda has enough problems to worry about without sterility ... Well, I was just
concerned, but you've put my poor mother's heart at ease. You !mow, really, our
schools need more exciting young men like you, I really mean that. Really. Oh, I do.
Goodbye, Mr. Goodman.
(By the end of her talk, on the phone, her face is left in a spotlight, and then the stage
goes black. The music theme comes in, in a minor key, softly at.first, but accentuated
by increasingly loud pulses which transmute into thunder crashes. There is a scream
heard from upstairs and we see the set in night shadows. TILLIE tears open her
bedroom door and rushes into BEATRICE 's room. RUTH screams again.)
TILLIE: Mother! She's going to have one!
(RUTH appears on the landing and releases another scream which breaks off into ga,1ps.
She starts down the stairs and stops halfway to scream again. There is another
tremendous thunder crash as BEATRICE comes out of her room, puts on the hall light,
and catches the hysterical girl on the stairs.)
BEATRICE: (Shouting.) Stop it! Stop it, Ruth!
TILLIE: (At the top of the stairs.) She's going!
BEATRICE: Ruth! Stop it!
TILLIE: She's going to go!
BEATRICE: (Yelling at TILLIE.) Shut up and get back in your room! (RUTH screams.)
You're not going to let yourself go, do you hear me, Ruth? You're not going to go!
RUTH: He's after me! (She screams, lightning and thunder crash follow.)
BEA TRICE: You were dreaming, do you hear me? Nobody's after you' Nobody!
TILLIE: I saw her eyes start to go back BEATRICE: (To TILLIE.) Get back in your room! (She helps RUTH down the rest of the
stairs.) There, now, nobody's after you. Nice and easy. Breathe deeply ... Did the big
bad man come after my little girl? (Slie sits RUTH down and then puts both hands up
to her own face and pulls her features into a comic mask. RUTH begins to laugh at
her.) That big bad bogey man? (They both laugh heartily.) Now that wasn't so bad,
was it?
RUTH: It was the dream, with Mr. Mayo again.
BEATRICE: Oh. Well, we'll just get you a little hot milk and- (A tremendous thunder
crash throws the set into shadows.) Why, the electricity's gone off. Do you remember
what happened to those candles?
RUTH: What candles?
BEATRICE: The little white ones from my birthday cake last year.
RUTH: Tillie melted them down for school a long time ago.
BEATRICE: (Searching through drawers.) She had no right to do that.
RUTH: She asked you. She used them to attach a paper straw to a milk bottle with a
balloon over it, and it was supposed to tell if it was going to rain.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE: (Finding a.flashlight.) There! It works. I don't want her wasting anything
of mine unless she's positive I won't need it. You always need candles. (She steers
RUTH toward the couch as lightning flashes.) Why, Ruth - your skin just turned ice
cold! (She rummages through one of the boxes and grabs a blanket.) This will warm
you up ... What's the matter?
RUTH: The flashlight BEATRICE: What's wrong with it?
RUTH: It's the same one 1 used to check on Mr. Mayo with.
BEATRICE: Soitis. Wedon'tneedit.
RUTH: No, let me keep it. (Starting to laugh.) Do you want to know how they have it in
the history?
BEATRICE: No, I don't.
RUTH: Well, they say I came out of my room ... (She .flashes the light on her room.)
... And I started down the stairs, step by step ... and I heard the choking and banging
on the bed, and ...
BEATRICE: I'm going back to bed.
RUTH:No!
BEATRICE: Well, talk about something nice, then.
RUTH: Oh, Mama, tell me about the wagon.
BEATRICE: You change so fast I can't keep up with you.
RUTH: Mama,please ... the story about the wagon.
BEATRICE: I don't know anything about telling stories. Get those great big smart
teachers of yours to do that sort of stuff.
RUTH: Tell me about the horses again, and how you stole the wagon.
BEATRICE: Don't get me started on that.
RUTH: Mama, please ...
BEATRICE: (Taking out a pack of cigarettes.) Do you want a cigarette?
RUTH: (Taking one.) Leave out the part where they shoot the horses, though. (They both
light up.)
BEATRICE: Honey, you !mow the whole storyRUTH: "Apples! Pears! Cu .. .cumbers!"
BEATRICE: No. It's "Apples! Pears! Cucwn ... bers!"
(17iey say it together.)
BEATRICE AND RUTH: "Apples! Pears! Cucum .. .bers!" (And they laugh.)
RUTH: How did you get the wagon out without him seeing you?
BEATRICE: That was easy. Every time he got home for the day he'd make us both
some sandwiches - my mama had been dead for years - and he'd take a hap on the
old sofa that used to be ... there! (She points to a corner of the room.) And while he
was sleeping l got the horses hitched up and went riding around the block waving to
everyone.
RUTH: Oh, Mama, you didn't'
BEATRICE: Of course I did. I had more nerve than a bear when I was a kid. Let me tell
you it takes nerve to sit up on that wagon every day yelling "Apples! ... (Both
together) Pears! Cucum ... bers!" (They laugh again.)
RUTH: Did he find out you took the wagon?

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE: Did he find out? He came running down the street after me and started
spanking me right on top of the wagon - not hard - but it was so embarrassing - and I
had one of those permy marslunallow ships in the back pocket of my overalls, and it
got all squished. And you better believe I never did it again ... You would have loved
him, Ruth, and gone out with him on the wagon ... all over Stapleton yelling as loud as
you wanted.
RUTH: "Apples! Pears! Cu .. .cumbers!"
BEATRICE: No!
RUTH: "Cucum .. .hers!"
BEATRICE: My father made up for all the other men in this whole world, Ruth. If only
you two could have met. He'd only be about seventy now, do you realize that? And
I'll bet he'd still be selling vegetables around town. All that fun - and then I don't
think I ever knew what really hit me.
RUTH: Don't tell about BEA TRICE: Don't worry about the horses.
RUTH: What hit you?
BEATRICE: Well it was just me and Papa ... and your father hanging around. And then
Papa got sick ... and I drove with him up to the sanatorium. And then I came home
and there were the horses RUTH: Mother!
BEATRICE: And I had the horses ... taken care of. And then Papa got terribly sick and
he begged me to marry so that he'd be sure I'd be taken care of. (She laughs.) Ifhe
knew how I was taken care of he'd tum over in his grave. And nightmares! Do you
want to !mow the nightmare I used to have? I never had nightmares over the fights
with your father, or the divorce, or this thrombosis - he deserved it - 1 never had
nightmares over any of that. Let me tell you about my nightmare that used to come
back and back: Well, I'm on Papa's wagon, but it's newer and shinier, and it's being
pulled by beautiful white horses, not dirty workhorses - these are like circus horses
with long manes and tinsel - and the wagon is blue, shiny blue. And it's full - filled
with yellow apples and grapes and green squash. You're going to laugh when you
hear this. I'm wearing a lovely gown with jewels all over it, and my hair is piled up
on top of my head with a long feather in it, and the bells are ringing. Huge bells
swinging on a gold braid strung across the back of the wagon, and they're going
DONG, DONG ... DONG, DONG. And I'm yelling "APPLES! PEARS!
CUCUM ... BERS!"
RUTH: That doesn't sound like a nightmare to me.
BEATRICE: And then I tum down our street and all the noise stops. This long street,
with all the doors of the houses shut and everything crowded next to each other, and
there's not a soul around. And then I start getting afraid that the vegetables are going
to spoil. .. and that nobody's going to buy anything, and I feel as though I shouldn't be
on the wagon, and I keep trying to call out. But there isn't a sound. Not a single
sound. Then I turn my head and look at the house across the street. I see an upstairs
window, and a pair of hands pull the curtains slowly apart. I see the face of my father
and my heart stands still... Ruth ... take the light out of my eyes. (A long pause.)
RUTH: Is Nanny going to die here?
BEATRICE: No.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

RUTH: How can you be sure?
BEATRICE: I can tell.
RUTH: Are you crying?
BEATRICE: What's left for me, Ruth"
RUTH: What, Marna?
BEATRICE: What's left for me?
(The stage goes slowly dark as the drizzling rain becomes louder and then disappears.
When the lights come up again NANNY is seated at the kitchen table with a bottle of
beer and a glass in front of her. TILLIE comes in the front door with a box of large
marigold plants and sets them down where they 'ii be inconspicuous. She gets the
rabbit out of its cage, sits down near NANNY and gives her a little wave. BEATRICE
suddenly appears at the top of the stairs and drops a stack of newspapers with a loud
thud. She goes back into her room and lets.fly another armful ofjunk.)
TILLIE: What are you doing?
BEATRICE: A little housecleaning, and you're going to help. You can start by getting
rid of that rabbit or I'll suffocate the bastard. (She takes a drink from a glass of
whiskey.) You don't think I will, do you? You wait and see. Where's Ruth? She's
probably running around the schoolyard in her brassiere. (She comes downstairs.)
TILLIE: Mother, they want me to do something at school.
BEATRICE: NANNY! DID YOU HEAR THAT? THEY WANT HER TO DO
SOMETHING AT SCHOOL! ISN'T THAT MOMENTOUS, NANNY? Well I want
you to do something around here. Like get rid of that bunny. I'm being generous! I'll
let you give it away. Far away. Give it to Mr. Goodman. I'd chloroform the thing
myself, but that crazy sister of yours would throw convulsions for fifty years ... and I
hate a house that vibrates. And get rid of those sterile marigolds. They stink! HI,
NANNY~ HOW ARE YOU, HONEY? HOW WOULD YOU LIKE TO GO ON A
LONG TRIP? You see, everybody, I spent today taking stock of my life and I've
come up with zero. I added up all the separate departments and the total reads zero ...
zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero
zero ... And do you know how you pronounce that, with all your grammatical
schoolin'
and
foolin'?
You
pronounce
it
o,o,o,o,O,O,O,O,O,O,!
o,o,o,o,O,O,O,O,O,O,O,O! Right, Nanny? RIGHT, NANNY? So, by the end of the
week, you get rid of that cottontail compost heap and we'll get you a job dowli at the
five-and-ten-cent store. And if you don't do so well with the public, we'll fix you up
with some kind of machine. Wouldn't that be nice?
(RUTH enters at c, gallop, throwing her books down and babbling a mile a minute.)
RUTH: (Enthusiastically.) Can you believe it? I didn't, until Chris Burns came up and
told me about it in Geography, and then Mr. Goodman told me himself during the
eighth period in the office when I was eavesdropping. Aren't you so happy you could
bust? Tillie? I'm so proud I can't believe it, Marna. Everybody was talking about it
and nobody ... well, it was the first time they all came up screaming about her and I
said, "Yes, she's my sister 1" I said it, "She's my sister! My sister! My sister!" Give
me a cigarette.
BEATRICE: Get your hands off my personal property.
RUTH: I'll scratch your back later.
BEATRICE: I don't want you to touch me!

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

RUTH: Did he call yet? My God, I can't believe it, I just can't!
BEATRICE: Did who call yet?
RUTH: I'm not supposed to tell you, as Mr. Goodman's private secretary, but you're
going to get a call from school.
BEATRICE: (To TILLIE.) What is she talking about?
TILLIE: I was in the Science Fair at school.
RUTH: Didn't she tell you yet? Oh, Tillie, how could you? She's fantastic, Mama! She's
a finalist in the Science Fair. There were only five of them out of hundreds and
hundreds. She won with all those plants over there. They're freaks! Isn't that a
scream? Dr. Berg picked her himself. The p1incipal! And I heard Mr. Goodman say
she was going to be another Madam Pasteur and he never saw a girl do anything like
that before and ... so I told everybody, "Yes, she's my sister!" Tillie, "You're my
sister!" I said. And Mr. Goodman called the Advance and they're coming to take your
picture. Oh, Mama, isn't it crazy? And nobody laughed at her, Mama. She beat out
practically everybody and nobody laughed at her. "She's my sister," I said. "She's my
sister!" (The telephone rings.) That must be him! Mama, answer it - I'm afraid.
(Ring.) Answer it before he hangs up! (Ring.) Mama! He's gonna hang up! (RUTH
grabs the phone.) Hello? ... Yes ... (Aside to BEATRICE.) It's him! ... Just a minute,
please ... (Covering the mouthpiece.) He wants to talk to you.
BEATRICE: Who?
RUTH: The principal!
BEATRICE: Hang up.
RUTH: I told him you were here! Mama! (BEATRICE gets up and shuffles slowly to the
phone.)
BEATRICE: (Finally, into the phone.) Yes? .. .I know who you are, Dr. Berg .. .I
see ... Couldn't you get someone else? There's an awful lot of work that has to be
done around here, because she's not as careful with her home duties as she is with
man-in-the-moon marigolds ... Me? What would you want with me up on the
stage? ... The other mothers can do as they please .. .I would have thought you had
enough in your history without .. .I'll think about it ... Goodbye, Dr. Berg ... (Pause,
then screaming.) I SAID I'D THINK ABOUT IT! (She hangs up the phone, turns her
face slowly to RUTH, then to TILLIE, who has herface hidden in shame in the rabbit's
fitr.)

RUTH: What did he say?
BEATRICE: (Flingh1g her glass on the floor.) How could you do this to me? HOW
COULD YOU LET THAT MAN CALL OUR HOME! I have no clothes, do you hear
me? I'd look just like you up on the stage, ugly little you! DO YOU WANT THEM
TO LAUGH AT US? LAUGH AT THE TWO OPUS?
RUTH: (Disbelievingly.) Mother. .. aren't you proud of her? Mother. . .it's an honor.
(TILLIE breaks into tears and moves away from BEATRICE. It seems as though she is
crushed, but then she halts and turns to face her mother.)
TILLIE: (Through tears.) But ... nobody laughed at me. (BEATRICE's face begins to
sofien as she glimpses what she's done to TILLIE.)
BEATRICE: Oh, my God ...
(TILLIE starts toward her. BEATRICE opens her arms to receive her as music starts in and
lights.face. A chord ofjinality punctuates the end ofAct I.)

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

(About two weeks later. The room looks somewhat cheery and there is excitement in the
air. It is early evening and preparations are being made ji,r TILLIE to take her project
to the final judging of the Science Fair. TILLIE has been dressed by her mother in
clothes which are clean but too girlish for her awkwardness. Her hair has been
curled, she sports a large bow, and her dress is a starched flair. RUTH has dressed
herself up as well. She has put on too much makeup, and her lipstick has heen
extended beyond the natural line of her lips. She almost appears to be sinister. A
large three-panel screen stands on one of the tables. THE EFFECT OF GAMMA RAYS
ON MAN-IN-THE-MOON MARIGOLDS is printed in large letters running across the top
of the three panels. Below this one each panel there is a subtopic: THE PAST; THE
PRESENT; THE FUTURE. Additional charts and data appear below the titles.)
RUTH: The only competition you have to worry about is Janice Vickery. They say she
caught it near Princess Bay Boulevard and it was still alive when she took the skin off
it.
TILLIE: (Taking some plants from Ruth.) Let me do that please, Ruth.
RUTH: I'm sorry I touched them, really.
TILLIE: Why don't you feed Peter?
RUTH: Because I don't feel like feeding him ... Now I feel like feeding him. (She gets
some lettuce from a bag.) I heard that it screamed for three minutes after she put it in
because the water wasn't boiling yet. How much talent does it take to boil the skin off
a cat and then stick the bones together again" That's what I want to know. Ugh. I had
a dream about that, too. I figure she did it in less than a day and she ends up as one of
the top five winners ... and you spend months growing atomic flowers.
TILLIE: Don't you thinl, you should finish getting ready?
RUTH: Finish? This is it!
TILLIE: Are you going to wear that sweater?
RUTH: Look, don't worry about me. I'm not getting up on any stage, and if I did I
wouldn't be caught dead with a horrible bow like that.
TILLIE: Mother put it RUTH: They're going to laugh you off the stage again like when you cranked that atom
in assembly ... ! didn't mean that. .. The one they're going to laugh at is Mama.
TILLIE: What?
RUTH: I said the one they're going to laugh at is Mama ... Oh, let me take that bow off.
TILLIE: It's all right.
RUTH: Look, just sit still. I don't want everybody making fun of you.
TILLIE: What made you say that about Mama?
RUTH: Oh, I heard them talking in the Science Office yesterday. Mr. Goodman and
Miss Hanley. She's getting $12.63 to chaperon the thing tonight.
TILLIE: What were they saying?
RUTH: Miss Hanley was telling Mr. Goodman about Mama ... when she found out you
were one of the five winners. And he wanted to know if there was something wrong
with Mama because she sounded crazy over the phone. And Miss Hanley said she

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

was crazy and she always has been crazy and she can't wait to see what she looks like
after all these years. Miss Hanley said her nickname used to be Betty the Loon.
TILLIE: (As RUTH combs her hair.) Ruth, you're hurting me.
RUTH: She was just like you and everybody thought she was a big weirdo. There! You
look much better! (She goes back to the rabbit.) Peter, if anybody stuck you in a pot
of boiling water I'd kill them, do you know that? ... (Then to TILLIE.) What do they
call boiling the skin off a cat? I call it murder, that's what I call it. They say it was hit
by a car and Janice just scooped it up and before you could say bingo it was
screaming in a pot of boiling water. .. Do you know what they're all waiting to see?
Mama's feathers! That's what Miss Hanley said. She said Mama blabs as though she
was the Queen of England and just as proper as can be, and that her idea of getting
dressed up is to put on all the feathers in the world and go as a bird. Always trying to
.get -somewhere, like a great big bird.
TILLIE: Don't tell Mama, please. It doesn't matter.
RUTH: I was up there watching her getting dressed and sure enough, she's got the
feathers out.
TILLIE: You didn't tell her what Miss Hanley said?
RUTH: Are you kidding? I just told her I didn't like the feathers and I didn't think she
should wear any. But I'll bet she doesn't listen to me.
TILLIE: It doesn't matter.
RUTH: It doesn't matter? Do you think I want to be laughed right out of the school
tonight, with Chris Bums there, and all? Laughed right out of the school, with your
electric hair and her feathers on that stage, and Miss Hanley splitting her sides?
TILLIE: Promise me you won't say anything.
RUTH: On one condition.
TILLIE: What?
RUTH: Give Peter to me.
TILLIE: (Ignoring her.) The taxi will be here any minute and I won't have all this stuff
ready. Did you see my speech?
RUTH: I mean it. Give Peter to me.
TILLIE: He belongs to all ofus.
RUTH: For me. All for me. What do you care? He doesn't mean anything to you
anymore, now that you've got all those crazy plants.
TILLIE: Will you stop 9
RUTH: If you don't give him to me I'm going to tell Mama that everybody's waiting to
laugh at her.
TILLIE: Where are those typewritten cards?
RUTH: I MEAN IT! Give him to me 1
TILLIE: Does he mean that much to you?
RUTH:Yes!
TILLIE: All right.
RUTH: (After a burst of private laughter.) Betty the Loon ... (She laughs again.) That's
what they used to call her, you know. Betty the Loon'
TILLIE: I don't think that's very nice.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

RUTH: First they had Betty the Loon, and now they've got Tillie the Loon ... (To
rabbit.) You don't have to worry about me turning you in for any old plants ... How
much does a taxi cost from here to the school?
TILLIE: Not much.
RUTH: I wish she'd give me the money it costs for a taxi- and for all that cardboard and
paint and flowerpots and stuff. The only time she ever made a fuss over me was when
she drove me uuts.
TILLIE: Tell her to hurry, please.
RUTH: By the way, I went over to see Janice Vickery's pot, that she did you know what
in, and I started telling her and her mother about the worms in Mr. Alexander
Brougham's legs, and I got thrown out because it was-too near dinner time. That Mrs.
Vickery kills me. She can't stand worms in somebody else's legs but she lets her
daughter cook a cat.
TILLIE: ( Calling upstairs.) Mother! The taxi will be here any minute.
(BEATRICE comes to the top of the stairs. Her costume is strange, but not that strange, by
any means. She is even a little attractive tonight, and though her words say she is
greatly annoyed with having to attend the night's fimction, her tone and direction
show she is very, very proud.)
BEATRICE: You 're lucky I'm coming, without all this rushing me.
TILLIE: Mama, you look beautiful.
BEATRICE: Don't put it on too thick. I said I'd go and I guess there's no way to get out
of it. Do you mind telling me how I'm supposed to get up on the stage? Do they call
my name or what? And where are you going to be? If you ask me, they should've sent
all the parents a mimeographed sheet of instructions. If this is supposed to be such a
great event, why don't they do it right?
TILLIE: You just sit on the stage with the other parents before it begins.
BEATRICE: How long is this going to last? And remember, I don't care even if you do
win the whole damn thing, I'm not making any speech. I can hold my own anywhere,
but I hated that school when I went there and I hate it now ... and the only thing I'd
have to say is, what a pack of stupid teachers and vicious children they have. Imagine
someone tearing the skin off a cat.
RUTH: She didn't tear it. She boiled it off.
BEATRICE: You just told me upstairs that girl tore the skin off with an orange knife
and ... do you know, sometimes you exasperate me? (To TILLIE.) If you've got all the
plants in this box, I can manage the folding thing. Do you know I've got a headache
from doing those titles? And you probably don't even like them.
TILLIE: I like them very much.
BEATRICE: Look, if you don't want me to go tonight, I don't have to. You're about as
enthusiastic as a dummy about this whole thing.
TILLIE: I'm sorry.
BEA TRI CE: And I refuse to let you get nervous. Put that bow back in your hair.
RUTH: I took it out.
BEATRICE: What did you do that for?
RUTH: (Taking the rabbit in her arms.) Because it made her look crazy.
BEATRICE: How would you know what's crazy or not? If that sweater of yours was
any tighter it'd cut off the circulation in your chest. (Fussing over TILLIE.) The bow

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

looks very nice in your hair. There's nothing wrong with looking proper, Matilda, and
if you don't have enough money to look expensive and perfect, people like you for
trying to look nice. You know, one day maybe you will he pretty. You '11 have some
nice features, when that hair revives and you do some tricks with makeup. I hope you
didn't crowd the plants too close together. Did you find your speech?
TILLIE: Yes, mother.
BEATRICE: You know, Matilda, I was wondering about something. Do you think
you're really going to win? I mean, not that you won't be the best, but there's so
much polities in school. Don't laugh, but if there's anyone who's an expert on that,
it's me, and someday I'm going to write a book and blast that school to pieces. If
you're just a little bit different in this world, they try to kill you off.
RUTH: (Putting on her coat.) Tillie gave Peter to me.
BEATRICE: Oh? Then you inherited the rabbit droppings I found upstairs. What are
you doing with your coat on?
RUTH: I'm going out to wait for the taxi.
BEATRICE: Oh, no you're not. You start right in on the rah bit droppings. Or you won't
get another cigarette even if you scratch my back with an orange knife.
RUTH: I'm going down to the school with you.
BEATRICE: Oh, no you're not! You're going to keep company with that corpse in
there. If she wakes up and starts gagging just slip her a shot of whiskey. (The taxi
horn blows outside.) Quick! Grab the plants, Matilda- I'll get the big thing.
RUTH: I want to go! I promised Chris Burns I'd meet him.
BEATRICE: Can't you understand English?
RUTH: I've got to go!
BEATRICE: Shut up!
RUTH: (Almost berserk.) I don't care! I'M GOING ANYWAY!
BEATRICE: (Shoving RUTH hard.) WHAT DID YOU SAY?
TILLIE: Mother!
(After a pause, the horn blows again.)
BEATRICE: Hurry up with that box, Matilda, and tell him to stop blowing the horn.
HURRY UP! (TILLIE reluctantly exits with the box of plants.) I don't know where
you ever got the idea you were going tonight. Did you think nobody was going to
hold down the fort? ... Now you know how I felt all those years you and everybody
else was running out whenever they felt like it - because there was always me to
watch over the fifty-dollar-a-week corpse. If there's one thing I demand it's respect. I
don't ask for anything from you but respect.
RUTH: (Pathetically.) Why are you ashamed of me?
BEATRICE: I've been seen with a lot worse than you. I don't even know why I'm going
tonight, do you know that? Do you think I give one goddamn about the whole
thing? ... (She starts to fold the large three-panel screen with the titles THE PAST, THE
PRESENT, and THE FUTURE.) Do you want to know why I'm going? Do you really
want to know why this once somebody else has to stick with that dried prune for a
few minutes? Because this is the first time in my life I've ever felt just a little bit
proud over something. Isn't that silly? Somewhere in the back of this turtle-sized
brain of mine I feel just a little proud! Jesus Christ! And you begrudge me even that,
you little bastard.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

(The teed horn blows impatiently.)
RUTH: (In a hard voice.) Hurry up. They're waiting for you ... They're all waiting for
you.
BEATRICE: (Carrying the folded screen so that THE PAST is face out in bold black
letters.) I hope the paint is dry ... Who's waiting for me?
RUTH: Everybody .. .including Miss Hanley. She's been telling all the teachers ... about
you ... and they're all waiting.
BEA TRICE: You're such a little liar, Ruth, do you know that? When you can't have
what you want, you try to ruin it for everybody else. (She starts to the door.)
RUTH: Goodnight, Betty the Loon.
(BEATRICE stops as if she's been stabbed. The taxi horn blows several times as BEATRICE
puts down the ji,lding screen.)
BEATRICE: (Helplessly.) Take this thing.
RUTH: What for?
BEA TRICE: Go with Matilda.
RUTH: I don't want to go now.
BEATRICE: (Blasting.) GET OUT OF HERE!
RUTH: (Afier a long pause.) Now Tillie's going to blame it on me that you're not going
- and take the rabbit back. (The taxi beeps again, as RUTH puts her coat on.) l can't
help it what people call you. (She picks up the screen.) I'll tell Tillie you'll be down
later, all right? ... (BEATRICE does not respond.) Don't answer me. What do I care!
(RUTH exits. BEATRICE breaks into tears that shudder her body, and the lights go down
slowly on her pathetic form. Music in. Suddenly, a bolt of light strikes an area in the
right stage - JANICE VICKERY is standing in the spotlight holding the skeleton of a
cat mounted on a small platform. Her face and voice are smug.)
JANICE: The Past: I got the cat from the A.S.P.C.A. immediately after it had been
killed by a high-altitude pressure system. That explains why some of the rib bones are
missing, because that method sucks the air out of the animal's lungs and ruptures all
cavities. They say it prevents cruelty to animals but I think it's horrible. (She laughs.)
Then I boiled the cat in a sodium hydroxide solution until most of the skin pulled
right off, but I had to scrape some of the grizzle off the joints with a knife. You have
no idea how difficult it is to get right down to the bones. (A little gong sounds.) I have
to· go on to The Present, now - but I did want to tell you how long it took me to put
the thing together. I mean, as it is now, it's extremely useful for students of anatomy,
even with the missing rib bones, and it can be used to show basic anatomical aspects
of many, many animals that are in the same family as felines. I suppose that's about
the only present uses I can think for it, but it is nice to remember as an
accomplishment, and it looks good on college applications to show you did
something else in school besides dating. (She laughs, and a second gong sounds.) The
Future: The only future plans I have for Tabby - my little brother asked the
A.S.P.C.A. what its name was when he went to pick it up and they said it was called
Tabby, but I think they were kidding him - (She laughs again.) I mean as far as future
plans, I'm going to donate it to the science department, of course, and next year, if
there's another Science Fair perhaps I'll do the same thing with a dog. (A third gong
sounds.) Thank you very much for your attention, and I hope I win!

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

(JANICE and her spotlight disappear as suddenly as they had arrived, and music returns
as the lights come up slowly on BEATRICE. She has obviously been drinking and is

going through a phone book. Finding her number, she goes to the phone and dials.)
BEATRICE: I want to talk to the principal, please ... Well, you'll have to get him down
off the stage .. .It's none of your goddamn business who I am! ... Oh, I see ... Yes. I have
a message for him and Mr. Goodman, and you, too ... And this is for Miss Hanley,
too ... Tell them Mrs. Hunsdorfer called to thank them for making her wish she was
dead ... Would you give them that message, please? ... Thank you very much.
(She hangs up the phone, pauses, then surveys the room. Her attention fixes on the store
window covered with newspapers. The phone rings several times but she ignores it.
She goes to the window and proceeds to rip the paperfi-om it. That.finished, she turns
and surveys the room again. She goes to the kitchen table and rearranges its position.
She spies a card table with school supplies and hurls them on the floor. Next, she
goes to a bureau and rummages through drawers, _finding tablecloths and napkins.
She throws cloths on two or three tables and is heading toward the kitchen when the
phone rings again. The ringing triggers off something else she wants to do. She
empties a cup _filled with scraps of paper and finds a telephone number. She lifis the
receiver off the ringing phone and hangs up immediately. She lifts the receiver again,
checks to make sure there's a dial tone, and then dials the number on the scrap of
paper.)
BEATRICE: (Into the phone.) Hello. This is Mrs. Hunsdorfer. . .I'm sorry if I frightened
you, I wouldn't want you to think Nanny had deceased or anything like that - I can
imagine how terrible you'd feel if anything like that ever happened ... Terrible tragedy
that would be, Miss Career Woman of the Year. .. Yes, I'll tell you why I'm calling. I
want her out of here by tomorrow. I told you when you rolled her in here I was going
to try her out for a while and if I didn't like her she was to get the hell out. Well I
don't like her, so get her the hell out. .. It's like this. I don't like the way she cheats at
solitaire. Is that a good enough reason? ... Fine. And if she's not out of here by noon
I' 11 send her collect in an ambulance, you son of a bitch!
(She slams down the phone and bursts into laughter. The laugher subsides somewhat as
she pours herself another drink. She takes the drink to a chair and as she sits down
her foot accidentally hits the rabbit cage. She gives the cage a little kick and then an
idea strikes. She gets up and finds a large blue towel which she flings over her
shoulder. She gets the bottle ofchlorofi,rm and approaches the cage. Having reached
a decision she picks up the cage and takes it upstairs. Music in and lights fade. From
the darkness a beam of light f<dls on TILLIE in the same way JANICE VICKERY had
been presented.)
TILLIE: (Deathly afraid, and referring to her cards.) The Past: The seeds were exposed
to various degrees ... of gamma rays from radiation sources in Oak Ridge ... Mr.
Goodman helped me pay for the seeds .. .Their growth was plotted against... time.
(She loses her voice for a moment and then the.first gong sounds.) The Present: The
seeds which received little radiation have grown to plants which are normal in
appearance. The seeds which received moderate radiation gave rise to mutations such
as double blooms, giant stems, and variegated leaves. The seeds closest to the gamma
source were killed or yielded dwarf plants. (The second gong rings.) The Future:
After radiation is better understood, a day will come when the power of exploding

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

atoms will change the whole world we know. (With inspiration.) Some of the
mutations will be good ones - wonderful things beyond our dreams - and I believe, I
believe this with all my heart, THE DAY WILL COME WHEN MANKIND WILL
THANK GOD FOR THE STRANGE AND BEAUTIFUL ENERGY FROM THE
ATOM.
(Part of her last speech is reverberated electronically. Deep pulses of music are ctdded as
the light focuses on TILLIE 's fc1ce. Suddenly, there is silence, except.for RUTH picking
up TILLIE 's last words. The lights come up on the mctin set, and the room is empty.
RUTH bursts in the front door. She is carrying the three-pctnel card and a shopping
bag ofplants, both of which she drops on the.floor.)
RUTH: MAMA! MAMA! She won! Marna! Where are you? She won! (She runs back to
the front door and yells to TILLIE.) Hurry up! Hurry! Oh, my God, I can't believe it!
(Then yelling upstairs.) Marna! Corne on down! Hurry! (TILLIE comes in the front
door, carrying the rest of her plants, and the large trophy. RUTH takes the trophy.)
Give me that! (She starts upstairs.)Mama! Wait till you see this! (BEATRICE appears
at the top of the stairs. She has been drinking a great deal, and clings fc1st to a bunch
of old cheap curtains and other material.) Marna! She won ... (BEATRICE continues
mechanically on down the stairs.) Didn't you hear me? Tillie won the whole
thing! ... Marna? ... What's the matter with you? What did you rip the paper off the
windows for?
(BEATRICE commences taking up one of the curtains.)
TILLIE: Marna? Are you going to open a ... shop?
RUTH: What's the matter? Can't you even answer?
BEATRICE: (To TILLIE.) Hand me some of those tacks.
RUTH: (Screaming.) I SAID SHE WON! ARE YOU DEAF?
BEATRICE: Ruth, if you don't shut up I'm going to have you put away.
RUTH: They ought to put you away, BETTY THE LOON!
( There is ct long pause.)
BEATRICE: The rabbit is in your room. I want you to bury it in the morning.
RUTH: If you did anything .. .I'LL KILL YOU! (She runs upstairs.)
TILLIE: Mother, you didn't kill it, did you?
BEATRICE: Nanny goes tomorrow. First thing tomorrow.
(There is a cryfrom upstairs.)
TILLIE: Ruth? Are you all right?
BEATRICE: I don't know what it's going to be. Maybe a tea shop. Maybe not. (RUTH
appears in the doorway of her room. She is holding the dead rabbit on the blue towel.
As she reaches the top of the stairs, she begins to moan deeply.) After school you're
going to have regular hours. You'll work in the kitchen, you'll learn how to cook, and
you ·re going to earn your keep, just like in any other business.
(TILLIE starts slowly up the stairs toward RUTH.)
TILLIE: (With great fear.) Marna .. .! think she's going to go. (RUTH commences to
tremble. TILLIE speaks softly to her.) Don't go ... don't go ... (RUTH's eyes roll in her
head, and the trembling of her body hecomes pronounced throbbing. She drops the
rabbit with the towel covering it.) Help me! Mama! Help me!
BEATRICE: Snap out of it, do you hear rne 7 RUTH, DON"T LET YOURSELF GO!
(To TILLIE.) Help me get her downstairs'

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

(By the time the trio reaches the bottom of the stairs, RUTH is consumed by a violent
convulsion. BEATRICE holds her down and pushes TILLIE out of the way.)
BEATRICE: (Screaming.) Get the wooden spoon!
(TILLIE responds as BEATRlCE gets RUTH onto a sofa. The convulsion runs its course of a
fi,ll minute, then finally subsides. TILLIE gets a blanket and covers RUTH.)
TILLIE: Shall I call the doctor? (There is a long pause.) Shall I call the doctor?
BEATRICE: No. She'll be all right.
TILLIE: I think we should call him.
BEATRICE: I DIDN'T ASK YOU WHAT YOU THOUGHT! ... We're going to need
every penny to get this place open.
(BEATRICE spreads a tablecloth on one of the tables and places a pile of old cloth
napkins on it. She sits down and lights a cigarette.)
TILLIE: (Picking up the rabbit on the stairs.) I'd better bury him in the backyard. (She
starts out.)
BEATRICE: Don't bury the towel.
(TILLIE stops, sobs audibly, then gets control.)
TILLIE: I'll do it in the morning.
(She gently lays the rabbit near the door. She tucks RUTH in on the couch and sits a few
minutes by her sleeping sister. Music starts in softly as BEATRICE continues folding
napkins with her back to the others. There is the sound of someone at the curtained
doorway, and NANNY commences negotiating herself into the room. Slowly she
advances with the tubular frame - unaware, desiccated, in some other land.)
BEATRICE: (Weakly.) Matilda?
TILLIE: Yes, Mama?
BEATRICE: I hate the world. Do you know that, Matilda?
TILLIE: Yes, Mama.
BEATRICE: I hate the world.
(The lights have started down, the music makes its presence known, and a spot clings to
TILLIE. She moves to the staircase and the rest of the set goes to black during the
following speech. As she starts up the stairs her recorded voice takes over as in the
opening of the play.)
TILLIE'S VOICE: The Conclusion: My experiment has shown some of the strange
effects radiation can produce ... and how dangerous it can be if not handled correctly.··
Mr. Goodman said I should tell in this conclusion what my future plans are and how
this experiment has helped me make them. For one thing, the effect of gamma rays on
man-in-the-moon marigolds has made me curious about the sun and the stars, for the
universe itself must be like a world of great atoms - and I want to know more about
it. But most important, I suppose, my experiment has made me feel imp01iant - every
atom in me, in everybody, has come from the sun - from places beyond our dreams.
The atoms of our hands, the atoms of our hearts ... (All sound out. TILLIE speaks the
rest live - hope/id, glowing.) Atom. Atom. What a beautiful word.

THE END

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

APPENDIXB
THE EFFECT OF GAMMA RAYS ON
MAN-IN-THE-MOON MARIGOLDS
By
Paul Zindel
Plot Synopsis
Winner of the 1971 Pulitzer Prize, the Obie Award, and the New York
Drama Critics Circle Award as Best American Play of the season, this
powerful and moving study follows an embittered, vindictive widow and her
two young daughters as they seek to free themselves from their troubled past
and start a new life. Ridiculed by "normal" society, Beatrice, Tillie, and
Ruth retreat into their home, full of fear and mistrust - the world is a
dangerous place, and it has no place for them. Until, that is, Tillie discovers
the magic of science, and the world is revea_led to her in all its splendor. But
her choice to enter the school science fair threatens to demolish the walls
Beatrice has so carefully constructed around the family and subject them to
further torment. Hailed as one of the most significant and affecting plays of
our time, The Effect of Gamma Rays on Man-in-the-Moon Marigolds
explores the haunting and fonnidable question, "What makes each person
important?"
"Let's start with a single, simple word. Power...I don't know of a better
(play) of its genre since THE GLASS MENAGERIE ... " - NY Post

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

APPENDIXB
THE EFFECT OF GAMMA RAYS ON
MAN-IN-THE-MOON MARIGOLDS
By
Paul Zindel
Character Descriptions
BEATRICE - a middle-aged mother; unintelligent but inventive, funny,
controlling, insecure; has been beaten down by the world and is doing
everything in her power to hide her scars from her children; hides her frailty
behind her strength; takes out her anger on her kids, but can be caring when
they need her; concocts extravagant money-making schemes, none of which
ever sees completion; she has to be a woman, but inside she's just a girl
[strive for Beatrice's complexity and volatility; do not neglect her
sarcastic sense of humor]
RUTH - the eldest daughter (13); unintelligent, conniving, sensitive, energetic;
a bit of a floozy, very much wants people to like her; loves her family very
much, but can't seem to get her mother to love her back; survives by
sucking up to her mother; still, she's abused, and takes out her abuse on
Tillie; was committed to a mental institution; suffers from intense seizures
[Ruth wants to be want her mother wants her to be; do not play her as
crazy]
TILLIE - the youngest daughter (10); brilliant, calm, respectful, loving; is
nothing short of a scientific genius; knows that the best way to deal with her
mother is by not putting up a fight; wise beyond her years, really the only
adult in the family; finds wonder and beauty in everything; is an "old soul";
loves school
[go for Tillie's inner depth - despite her quiet demeanor, an entire world
exists inside her; do not play her as a little girl]
NANNY - an "ancient" woman (98); is a tenant in the home (Beatrice opens a
room for nursing care); neglected by her family; practically blind and deaf;
though her outward demeanor is pleasant (she's always smiling)

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

JANICE - Tillie's classmate, and her primary competition for the science fair;
a Valley girl/guy, but not stereotypical or cartoonish- the real thing
[do play her/him as a child; do not play her/him as if it's Clueless]

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

APPENDIXB
AUDITION PIECES
TILLIE
[This is Tillie's opening monologue. It begins the show.]

He told me to look at my hand, for a part of it came from a
star that exploded too long ago to imagine. This part of me was
formed from a tongue of fire that screamed through the heavens
until there was our sun. And this part of me - this tiny part of me was on the sun when it itself exploded and whirled in a great storm
until the planets came to be. And this small part of me was then a
whisper of the earth. When there was life, perhaps this part of me
got lost in a fern that was crushed and covered until it was coal.
And then it was a diamond millions of years later - it must have
been a diamond as beautiful as the star from which it had first
come.
Or perhaps this part of me became lost in a terrible beast, or
became part of a huge bird that flew above the primeval swamps.
And he said this thing was so small - this part of me was so small
it couldn't be seen - but it was there from the beginning of the
world. And he called this bit of me an atom. And when he wrote
the word, I fell in love with it. Atom. Atom. What a beautiful word.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE
[The capital letters are Beatrice speaking to Nanny, who is hard of hearing.
When she speaks to Nanny, her voice is saccharine sweet. Nanny cannot
hear the other dialogue.]

Fifty dollars a week. Fifty dollars. I look at you, Nanny, and I
wonder if it's worth it. I think I'd be better off driving a cab.
TAKE HONEY, NANNY. HONEY WITH HOTSY WATER!
You should have seen her daughter bring her here last week ... I
could have used you that day ... She came in pretending she was
Miss Career Woman of the Year. She said she was in real estate
and such a busy little woman, such a busy little woman - she just
couldn't give all the love and care and affection her little momsy
needed anymore ... Nanny's quite a little cross to bear, now aren't
you, Nanny dear?
Do you know what I'd be now ifit wasn't for this mud pool I
got sucked into? I'd probably be a dancer. Miss Betty Frank, The
Best Dancer of the Class of 19 ... something. One minute I'm the
best dancer in school - smart as a whip - the head of the whole
crowd! And the next minute ... One mistake. That's how it starts. I
used to wonder why people always said, "Why, just
yesterday ... why, just yesterday ... why, just yesterday ... " Before I
knew what happened I lost my dancing legs and got varicose legs.
Beautiful varicose legs. Do you know, everything I ever thought
I'd be has exploded! NANNY, YOU HURRY UP WITH THAT
HONEY! Exploded! You know, I almost forgot about everything I
was supposed to be ... NANNY'S DAUGHTER IS COMING TO
SEE YOU SOON. WILL THAT MAKE NANNY HAPPY? The
day Miss Career Woman of the Year comes to visit again I think
I'll drop dead. Nobody's too busy for anything they want to do,
don't you tell me. What kind of idiot do people take me for?
NANNY, YOU'RE SPILLING YOUR HOTSY! JESUS CHRIST!
You know, I ought to kick you right out and open that tea shop
tomorrow. Oh, it's coming. I can feel it.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

JANICE
[Jordan's presentation at the science.fair.]

The Past: I got the cat from the A.S.P.C.A. immediately after
it had been killed by a high-altitude pressure system. That explains
why some of the rib bones are missing, because that method sucks
the air out of the animal's lungs and ruptures all cavities. They say
it prevents cruelty to animals but I think it's horrible. (Laughs.)
Then I boiled the cat in a sodium hydroxide solution until most of
the skin pulled right off, but I had to scrape some of the grizzle off
the joints with a knife. You have no idea how difficult it is to get
right down to the bones. (A little gong sounds.) I have to go on to
The Present, now - but I did want to tell you how long it took me
to put the thing together. I mean, as it is now, it's extremely useful
for students of anatomy, even with the missing rib bones, and it
can be used to show basic anatomical aspects of many, many
animals that are in the same family as felines. I suppose that's
about the only present uses I can think for it, but it is nice to
remember as an accomplishment, and it looks good on college
applications to show you did something else in school besides
dating. (Laughs, and a second gong sounds.) The Future: The only
future plans I have for Tabby - my little brother asked the
A.S.P.C.A. what its name was when he went to pick it up and they
said it was called Tabby, but I think they were kidding him (Laughs again.) I mean as far as future plans, I'm going to donate
it to the science department, of course, and next year, if there's
another Science Fair perhaps I'll do the same thing with a dog. (A
third gong sounds.) Thank you very much for your attention, and I
hope I win!

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

1
BEATRICE: Matilda, that wasn't very nice of you to tell them I was
forcibly detaining you from school. Why, the way that Mr. Goodman
spoke, he must think I'm running a concentration camp. Do you have
any idea how embarrassing it is to be accused of running a
concentration camp for your own children? Well, it isn't embarrassing
at all. That school of yours is forty years behind the times anyway, and
believe me you learn more around here than that ugly Mr. Goodman
can teach you! You know, I really feel sorry for him. I never saw a man
with a more effeminate face in my life. When I saw you talking to him
by the lobster tank I said to myself, "Good Lord, for a science teacher
my poor girl has got herself a Hebrew hennaphrodite." Of course, he's
not as bad as Miss Hanley. The idea of letting her teach girl's gym is
staggering. And you have to place me in the embarrassing position of
giving them a reason to call me at eight-thirty in the morning, no less.
TILLIE: I didn't say anything.
BEATRICE: What do you tell them when they want to know why you
stay home once in a while?
TILLIE: I tell them I'm sick.
BEATRICE: Oh, you're sick all right, the exact nature of the illness
not fully realized, but you're sick all right. Any daughter that would
turn her mother in as administrator of a concentration camp has got be
suffering from something very peculiar.
TILLIE: Can I go in today, Mother?
BEATRICE: You'll go in, all right.
TILLIE: Mr. Goodman said he was going to do an experiment BEATRICE: Why, he looks like the kind that would do his
experimenting after sundown.
TILLIE: On radioactivity BEATRICE: On radioactivity? That's all that high school needs!
TILLIE: He's going to bring in the cloud chamber BEATRICE: Why, what an outstanding event. If you had warned me
yesterday I would've gotten all dressed to kill and gone with you today.
I love seeing cloud chambers being brought in.
TILLIE: You can actually seeBEATRICE: You're giving me a headache.

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

2

RUTH: The only competition you have to worry about is Janice
Vickery. They say she caught it near Princess Bay Boulevard and it
was still alive when she took the skin off it.
TILLIE: Why don't you feed Peter?
RUTH: Because I don't feel like feeding him ... Now I feel like
feeding him. I heard that it screamed for three minutes after she
put it in because the water wasn't boiling yet. How much talent
does it take to boil the skin off a cat and then stick the bones
together again? That's what I want to know. Ugh. I had a dream
about that, too. I figure she did it in less than a day and she ends up
as one of the top five winners ... and you spend months growing
atomic flowers.
TILLIE: Don't you think you should finish getting ready?
RUTH: Finish? This is it!
TILLIE: Are you going to wear that sweater?
RUTH: Look, don't worry about me. I'm not getting up on any
stage, and if I did I wouldn't be caught dead with a horrible bow
like that.
TILLIE: Mother put it RUTH: They're going to laugh you off the stage again like when
you cranked that atom in assembly .. .I didn't mean that ... The one
they're going to laugh at is Mama.
TILLIE: What?
RUTH: I said the one they're going to laugh at is Mama ... Oh, let
me take that bow off.
TILLIE: It's all right.
RUTH: Look, just sit still. I don't want everybody making fun of
you.
TILLIE: What made you say that about Mama?
RUTH: Oh, I heard them talking in the Science Office yesterday.
Mr. Goodman and Miss Hanley. She's getting $12.63 to chaperon
the thing tonight.
TILLIE: What were they saying?

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

RUTH: Miss Hanley was telling Mr. Goodman about Mama TILLIE: Ruth, you're hurting me.
RUTH: She was just like you and everybody thought she was a
big weirdo. There! You look much better!
TILLIE: Don't tell Mama, please. It doesn't matter.
RUTH: What do they call boiling the skin off a cat? I call it
murder, that's what I call it. They say it was hit by a car and Janice
just scooped it up and before you could say bingo it was screaming
in a pot of boiling water.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

3
RUTH: I'm going out to wait for the taxi.
BEATRICE: Oh, no you're not! You're going to keep company
with that corpse in there. If she wakes up and starts gagging just
slip her a shot of whiskey. (The taxi horn blows outside.) Quick!
Grab the plants, Matilda - I'll get the big thing.
RUTH: I want to go! I promised Chris Bums I'd meet him.
BEATRICE: Can't you understand English?
RUTH: I've got to go!
BEATRICE: Shut up!
RUTH: I don't care! I'M GOING ANYWAY!
BEATRICE: WHAT DID YOU SAY?
(After a pause, the horn blows again.)
BEATRICE: I don't know where you ever got the idea you were
going tonight. Did you think nobody was going to hold down the
fort? ... Now you know how I felt all those years you and everybody
else was running out whenever they felt like it - because there was
always me to watch over the fifty-dollar-a-week corpse. If there's
one thing I demand it's respect. I don't ask for anything from you
but respect.
RUTH: Why are you ashamed of me?
BEATRICE: I've been seen with a lot worse than you .. .I don't
even know why I'm going tonight, do you know that? Do you
think I give one goddamn about the whole thing? ... Do you want to
know why I'm going? Because this is the first time in my life I've
ever felt just a little bit proud over something. Isn't that silly?
Somewhere in the back of this turtle-sized brain of mine I feel just
a little proud! Jesus Christ! And you begrudge me even that, you
little bastard.

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

4
RUTH: Oh, Mama, tell me about the wagon.
BEATRICE: Don't get me started on that.
RUTH: Mama,please ...
BEATRICE: Honey, you know the whole storyRUTH: "Apples! Pears! Cu .. .cumbers!"
BEATRICE: No. It's "Apples! Pears! Cucum .. . bers!"
(They say it together.)
BEATRICE AND RUTH: "Apples! Pears! Cucum .. .bers!" (And they
laugh.)
RUTH: How did you get the wagon out without him seeing you?
BEATRICE: That was easy. Every time he got home for the day he'd
make us both some sandwiches - my mama had been dead for years and he'd take a nap on the old sofa that used to be ... there! And while
he was sleeping I got the horses hitched up and went riding around the
block waving to everyone.
RUTH: Oh, Mama, you didn't!
BEATRICE: Of course I did. I had more nerve than a bear when I was
a kid. Let me tell you it takes nerve to sit up on that wagon every day
yelling "Apples! ... (Both together) Pears! Cucum .. .bers!" (They laugh
again.)
RUTH: Did he find out you took the wagon?
BEATRICE: Did he find out? He came running down the street after
me and started spanking me right on top of the wagon - not hard - but
it was so emban-assing - and I had one of those penny marslunallow
ships in the back pocket of my overalls, and it got all squished. And
you better believe I never did it again ... You would have loved him,
Ruth, and gone out with him on the wagon ... all over Stapleton yelling
as loud as you wanted.
RUTH: "Apples! Pears! Cu .. .cumbers!"
BEATRICE: No!
RUTH: "Cucum .. .bers!"
BEATRICE: My father made up for all the other men in this whole
world, Ruth. If only you two could have met. He'd only be about
seventy now, do you realize that? And I'll bet he'd still be selling
vegetables around town.

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

APPENDIXC
WORKSHOP REHEARSAL REPORTS
[NOTE: At the time of the workshop, the iNtuitons hoard had not yet provided us with
rehearsal report forms. Consequently, we wrote down our activities in a notebook.]

September 19, 2006 - Tuesday

7:00-9:00 - First read-through and discussion

September 20, 2006 - Wednesday

7-9:05 - Film
9:20-9:30 - Sweeping Exercise
9:30-9:50 - Floor Relaxation Exercise
9:50-10:00- Stare Down
10:00-10:15-Chair Lifting
10: 15-10:30 - Chopstick Balancing
10:30-10:50 -Minimal Contact

September 21, 2006 - Thursday

7-7:40 -Relaxation Exercises
7:40-7:45 - Staring Exercises
7:45-8:25 - Intro to Global Performance
8:25-8:50 - Art of Art's Sake Discussion
8:50-9:00 - Break
9:00-9:05 - Balinese Dance Tutorial
9:05-9:10 - Noh Theatre Tutorial
9: I 0-9: 15 - Facial Expression Exercise
9: 15-9:35 - Kathakali Dance tutorial
9:35-10:00 - Walking Exercise
I 0:00-10:20 - Mirror Game
10:20-10:30- Point of Focus
10:30-10:40 - Music Visualization
10:40-10:45 - Silent Dance off
10:45-11:00 - Journal Writing

September 24, 2006 - Sunday

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

7:50-8:35 - Identity Discussion and Exercise
8:35-8:45 - Break
8:45-8:50 - Object Game
8:50-9:20 - Fabric Game
9:20-9:35 - Party Exercise
9:35-10:15-Freeze
10: 15-10:45 - Memory and Emotion Exercise
10:45-11 :00 - Journal Writing

September 25, 2006 - Monday
Guest: Nancy Kantra from Philadanco
7:00-7:30 - History of Dance Discussion (guest)
7:31-7:55 - Ballet Tutorial (guest)
7:55-8:15 -Movement as a Medium of Expression Discussion
8:15-8:25 -Breal<
8:25-8:55 - Relaxation Exercises
8:55-9:20 - Simulation Discussion
9:20-10:05 - Alienation Effect Exercises
10:05-10:30 - Clothes Game
10:30-10:45 - Journal Writing

September 26, 2006 - Tuesday
7: 10-7 :25 - Relaxation Exercises
7:25-8:25 - "Marat/Sade" Viewing and Discussion
8:25-8:35 - Break
8:35-8:55 - Relaxation Exercises
8:55-9:25 - Face Painting
9:25-9:50 - Sfo Exercise
9:50-10:20 -Journal Writing
[NOTE: Unji,rtunately, the rehearsal report.for September 27, 2006 - Wednesday was
lost. Neither Laird, the stage manager, nor I could locate it.]

September 28, 2006 - Thursday
7:00-7:20 -Annie Workshop
7:20-7:55 - Relaxation Exercises
7:55-8:10 - Staring Exercises
8: 10-8 :45 - Park Bench Improv
8:45-9:05 - Cops and Robbers

Robert Caleb Green
9:05-9:15 - Break
9:15-9:50 - Freeze
9:50-10:55 -Improv Entire Play

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

APPENDIXC
The Effects of Gamma Rays on Man in the Moon Marigolds
Rehearsal Report
Written by Paul Zindel
Directed by Caleb Green
lntuitons Experimental Theatre Company Fall 2006

Date: I 0/0 I

Location: Arch, Room 313
Time
7:00-7:20-p. 9-12 Tabling
7:20 - 9:00 - Trash Can Exercise
9:00- 9:15 - Break
9:15-10:35 -pg. 2-5 (Tabled and
Blocked)
10:35-11:00-Journal Writing

Call Time: 7:00 PM
Rehearsed: pg. 9-12 (Tabling and Trash Can
Exercise)
Pg. 2-5 (Tabled and Blocked)
Absent: Sydney Blum, Ilana Millner (7-9)

Cast

Set
Move Armchair to SL side of couch

Lighting

Sound

Props
Wet clothes in dryer (p.2)
Newspaper (off SL) p. 2
Cigarettes on Kitchen Table
Lipstick in Beatrice's Purse (SR Drawer)
Backscratcher on Kitchen Table

Costumes
Please Email the Actors for their sizes.

Everyone!
If your script does not have page numbers, please number it.

Robert Caleb Green
Next Rehearsal

10/-2- 7PM- 11PM; Arch, Room 313

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

APPENDIXC
The Effects of Gamma Rays on Man in the Moon Marigolds
Rehearsal Report
Written by Paul Zindel
Directed by Caleb Green
Intuitons Experimental Theatre Company Fall 2006

Date: 10/02

Location: Arch, Room 313
Time
7:00-7:30-Seizure Work
7:30-7:35 - Break (for Carly)
7:35-9:20 - Storm Scene (pg. 912)
9:20-9:30 - Break
9:30-10:45 -Act 2 (pg. 14-18)
10:45-11 :00 - Journal Writing

Call Time: 7:00 PM
Rehearsed: pg. 9-12 (Blocked)
Pg. 14-18 (Tabled and Blocked)
Absent: Sydney Blum,

Cast

Set

Lighting

Sound
Meeting with Caleb 10/03 at 4:45 in the
HRS Upper Lobby

Props

Costumes
Please schedule a time to come into
rehearsal on Thursday.

Everyone!
If your script does not have page numbers, please number it.

Robert Caleb Green

Next Rehearsal
10/03- 7PM - 11PM; Arch, Room 313

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

APPENDIXC
The Effects of Gamma Rays on Man in the Moon Marigolds
Rehearsal Report
Written by Paul Zindel
Directed by Caleb Green
Intuitons Experimental Theatre Company Fall 2006

Date: 10/03

Location: Arch, Room 313
Time
7:00-7:50 - Beatrice Character
Work
7:50-9:00 - Beatrice's
Monologues
9:00-9:10 -Break
9: 10-10:00 - pg. 5-8 Blocked
l 0:00- l 0:45 - Tilly's Monologues
10:40-11:00 - Journal Writing

Call Time: 7:00 PM
Rehearsed: Beatrice and Tilly's Monologues
Pg. 5-8 Blocked
Ahsent:

Cast

Set

Lighting

Sound
Added five Gong sounds (pg. 18-19)

Props
Changed Honey .Jar to Honey Packets

Costumes
Please schedule a time to come into
rehearsal on Thursday.

Everyone!
If your script does not have page numbers, please number it.

Robert Caleb Green
Next Rehearsal
10/04- 7PM - 11 PM; Arch, Room 313

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Senior Thesis, Antlnopology

Robert Caleb Green

APPENDIXC
The Effects of Gamma Rays on Man in the Moon Marigolds
Rehearsal Report
Written by Paul Zindel
Directed by Caleb Green

Date: 10/04 Location: Arch, Room 313
Time
7:00-7:45 - Scene 1 WorkBeatrice
7:45-8:30 - Phone Work Beatrice
8:30-8:45 - Break
8:45-9:45 - Blocked last scene
Act 1
9:25-10:10 -Beatrice Work
10:10-10:35 -Janice/Jordan Work

Call Time: 7:00 PM
Rehearsed: Beatrice's phone work
Scene 1
Last Scene of Act 1
Janice's presentation
Absent:

Cast
Remember to bring in costume items
tomorrow

Set
We need a small table for the Science Fair
presentations.

Lighting

Sound

Props

Costumes
Coming to rehearsal tomorrow at 9PM.

Robert Caleb Green

Everyone!
If your script does not have page numbers, please number it.

Next Rehearsal
10/05- 7PM-1 IPM; Arch, Room 313

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Senior Thesis, Antln·opology

Robert Caleb Green

APPENDIXC
The Effects of Gamma Rays on Man in the Moon Marigolds
Rehearsal Report
Written by Paul Zindel
Directed by Caleb Green
iNtuitons Experimental Theatre Company Fall 2006

Date: 10/05 Location: Arch, Room 313

Call Time: 7:00 PM
Rehearsed: Beatrice's phone work (p. 18, 19-)

Time
7:00-9:00- Beatrice Work
9:00-9:30- Costume Meeting
9:30-9:40- Break
9:40-10:45 -

Absent:

Cast
th
Off-Book by Wednesday Oct. 11 -

Set
Kitchen Table will work fine for the
Science Fair

Lighting

Sound

Props
Add Tacks to Prop List (pg. 20)
I need a copy of the Props List Before
Sunday's rehearsal.

Costumes
Came to rehearsal, looked at some items,
good times.

Everyone!
If your script does not have page numbers, please number it.

Robert Caleb Green
Next Rehearsal

10/08- 7PM- 11PM; Arch, Room 313

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

APPENDIXC
The Effects of Gamma Rays on Man in the Moon Marigolds
Rehearsal Report
Written by Paul Zindel
Directed by Caleb Green
i.rituitons Experimental Theatre Company Fall 2006

Date: 10/08

Location: Arch, Room 313

Time
7:00-8:20 -pg. 14-16

Call Time: 7:00 PM
Rehearsed: worked through pg. 14-16
Absent:

Cast
Off-Book by Wednesday Oct. 11 th .

Set

Lighting

Sound

Props
.
Add Tacks to Prop List (pg. 20)
I need a copy of the Props List ASAP.
Emer or Maggie please email it to me
tonight.

Costumes

Everyone!
We lost the ultimate Frisbee match 13-4.

Robert Caleb Green

Next Rehearsal
10/09- 7PM - 11 PM; Arch, Room 313

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

APPENDIXC
The Effects of Gamma Rays on Man in the Moon Marigolds
Rehearsal Report
Written by Paul Zindel
Directed by Caleb Green
iNtuitons Experimental Theatre Company Fall 2006

Date: I 0/09

Location: Arch, Room 313
Time
7:00-8:55 - Beatrice's Phone
Calls
8:55-9:05 - Break
9:05-10:25 - pg. 5-7
10:25-10:40 -pg. 10-12
10:40-11 :00 - Beatrice Character
Work

Call Time: 7:00 PM
Rehearsed: pg. 1, 9; 5-7
Absent:

Cast
Off-Book by Wednesday Oct. I 1th •

Set

Lighting

Sound

Props

Costumes

Everyone!

Robert Caleb Green

Next Rehearsal
10/10- 7PM - 11PM; Arch, Room 313

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

APPENDIXC
The Effects of Gamma Rays on Man in the Moon Marigolds
Rehearsal Report
Written by Paul Zindel
Directed by Caleb Green
iNtuitons Experimental Theatre Company Fall 2006

Date: 10/10

Location: Arch, Room 313
Time
7: 15-8:25 - First Ruu Through
8:25-8:35 - Break
st
8:35-8:50 - I Run Through
Notes
8:50-10:40-Individual Work
10:40-11:00 - End of Act l(p. 1213)

Call Time: 7:00 PM
Rehearsed: Full Run
Absent:

Cast
Off-Book by tomorrow, Wednesday Oct.
l I'\

Set

Lighting
Shults will be coming to rehearsal
tomorrow. Woohoo.

Sound

Props
Can we Armie break a glass on pg. 13?

Costumes

Everyone!

...

Robert Caleb Green
Next Rehearsal
I 0/11- 7PM - 11PM; Arch, Room 313

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

APPENDIXC
The Effects of Gamma Rays on Man in the Moon Marigolds
Rehearsal Report
Written by Paul Zindel
Directed by Caleb Green
iNtuitons Experimental Theatre Company Fall 2006

Date: I 0/15

Location: Arch, Room 313

Time
7:00-8:45 - Line Throughs
8:45-9:30 - Freeze
9:30-9:40 - Break
9:40-11 :00 - Improvisation within
the play

Call Time: 7:00 PM
Rehearsed: Full Run (Off Book)
Absent: Sydney Blum ( excused)

Cast

Set

Lighting

Sound

Props

Costumes

Everyone!

Robert Caleb Green
Next Rehearsal
I 0/16- 7PM - 11PM; Arch, Room 313

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

APPENDIXC
The Effects of Gamma Rays on Man in the Moon Marigolds
Rehearsal Report
Written by Pau! Zindel
Directed by Caleb Green
iNtuitons Experimental Theatre Company Fall 2006

Date: I 0/16

Location: Arch, Room 313
Time
7:30-7:55 - Freeze
7:55-8:50 - Outside Scenarios
8:50-9:00 - Break
9:00-10:50 - First Scene Touchups

Call Time: 7:00 PM
Rehearsed: Full Run (Off Book)
Absent:

Cast
Thursday (I 1/19) is the last day to call
"line." Come back from break completely
off book.

Set

Lighting

Sound
Schedule Monologue Recording Session
for Thursday (I 0/19) after 4PM.

Props

Costumes

Everyone!
9:36

Robert Caleb Green

Next Rehearsal

I0/16-7PM- l 1PM; Arch, Room 313

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

APPENDIXC
The Effects of Gamma Rays on Man in the Moon Marigolds
Rehearsal Report
Written by Paul Zindel
Directed by Caleb Green
iNtuitons Experimental Theatre Company Fall 2006

Date: 10/17 Location: Arch, Room 313
Time
7:15-7:35: Bottle Game
7:35-7:55: Bonding Exercise
7:55-9:05 : Full Run
9:05-9:20: Break
9:20-10:30: Notes
10:30-10:45: Last Scene
10:45-11 :00: Beginning of 2 nd Act

Call Time: 7:00 PM
Rehearsed: Fnll Run (Off Book)
Absent:

Cast
Thursday (11/19) is the last day to call
"line." Come back from break completely
off book.

Set

Lighting

Sound
Schedule Monologue Recording Session
for Thursday (10/19) after 4PM.

Props

Costumes

Everyone!

Robert Caleb Green
Next Rehearsal

10/16- 7PM - 11PM; Arch, Room 313

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

APPENDIXC
The Effects of Gamma Rays on Man in the Moon Marigolds
Rehearsal Report
Written by Paul Zindel
Directed by Caleb Green
iNtuitons Experimental Theatre Company Fall 2006

Date: I 0/18

Location: Arch, Room 313
Time
7:00-8:30- PAC Shop Costuming
8:30-9:40- Full Run
9 :40-9: 50 - Break
9:50-10:30- Notes
I 0:30-11 :00 - I st Act with
Suggestions

Call Time: 7:00 PM
Rehearsed: Full Run (Off Book)
Absent:

Cast
Thursday (11/19) is the last day to call
"line." Come back from break completely
off book.

Set
Can we go to the shop next week to look at
the staircase? (concern about seizure on
them)

Lighting

Sound
Re-Schedule Monologue Recording
Session for next Thursday (10/26) after
4PM.

Props
.
Glass of Water during Opening Scene

Costumes

Everyone!
Designer's Run! Tomorrow, 9:30 in ARCH 313

Robert Caleb Green

Next Rehearsal
10/16- 7PM - 11 PM; Arch, Room 313

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

APPENDIXC
The Effects of Gamma Rays on Man in the Moon Marigolds
Rehearsal Report
Written by Paul Zindel
Directed by Caleb Green
iNtuitons Experimental Theatre Company Fall 2006

Date: 10/24

Location: Arch, Room 313
Time
7:00-7:40 -Italian Run
7:40-9:15 - Hot Seating
9:15-9:25-Break
9:25-10:45 - Full Run

Call Time: 7:00 PM
Rehearsed: Full Run (Off Book)
Absent:

Cast

Set

Lighting
When writing cues in your script for Paper
Tech please number the cues (odd numbers
only) i.e. Cue 1, Cue 3

Sound
When writing cues in your script for Paper
Tech please letter the cues i.e. Cue A, Cue
B ...
Oh! And can you skip Q ifnecessary ... cue
Q isn't cool

Props

Costumes

Everyone!
Paper Tech Saturday 10/28 at 11 AM.

Robert Caleb Green

Next Rehearsal
10/25- 7PM - 11PM; Arch, Room 313

Senior Thesis, Antin-apology

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

APPENDIXC
The Effects of Gamma Rays on Man in the Moon Marigolds
Rehearsal Report
Written by Paul Zindel
Directed by Caleb Green
iNtuitons Experimental Theatre Company Fall 2006

Date: I 0/26

Location: Arch, Room 3 I 3
Time
7:00-7:30-EndofAct I Touch up
7:30-8:15 -Freeze
8: 15-9:20 - Improv First Act
9:20-9:30 - Break
9:30-10:20 - Improv Second Act

Call Time: 7:00 PM
Rehearsed: Full Run (Off Book)
Absent:

Cast

Set

Lighting
When writing cues in your script for Paper
Tech please number the cues (odd numbers
only) i.e. Cue I, Cue 3

Sound
When writing cues in your script for Paper
Tech please letter the cues i.e. Cue A, Cue
B ...
Oh! And can you skip Q if necessary ... cue
Q isn't cool

Props

Costumes

Everyone!
Paper Tech Saturday 10/28 at 11 AM. Only Designers, Sloan, and Caleb (ifhe wants to
attend)

Robert Caleb Green

Next Rehearsal
NEVER! LOAD-IN ON SUNDAY!

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

APPENDIXD
REHEARSAL TRANSCRIPT
Oct. 10, 2006 7-11 pm
(Transcribed by Jenny Birnkrant)
Caleb: Annie, we're going to work on monologue to get emotional range and phone
conversations on point. We'll take the first phone conversation and use whatever mood
you're in as a starting point. Just go this first time without interruption. Remember the
work that we did last time and the emotional and expressive range that Beatrice is starting
to achieve. This is real, co111111it to it.
[I.i. : phone conversation]
C: How did you feel?
A: It started to feel more comfortable, but there needs to be more extreme reaction.
C: Yeah that's the problem right now. You're starting off each night at a higher point,
but some of the pauses felt like you were trying to be on the phone. Sometimes it
sonnded like you were really talking to someone, but sometimes it didn't. Your focus
and energy ... we can tell when it goes off.
A: It's hard when you get off ofit.
C: That's why actors are terrified of forgetting their lines onstage because you need to
know that your concentration isn't going to be uselessly broken .. But that's what's going
to happen with the audience ... you have to maintain that focus. How did the starting
point influence everything you did?
A: It influenced up to a point, but I feel like she's being woken up and she's not in a good
mood, so I can't imagine having her be in a good mood. The only thing it did influence
was when you did the rings, I really answered the phone.
C: I want to put in some blocking, then go through it once, and have all your conversation
focus on what you're saying.
C: I want the cord to be tangled. Answer the phone, untangle the cord. I want you to
grab your pack of cigarettes off the kitchen table. It emphasizes the fact that you're
messing with him as you're smoking your cigarettes. "Lobster tank ... " do something in
the kitchen, like get a glass of water. Sit down in the armchair and smoke: "Well I
encourage her. .. " and play with the lighter so we can see you're not really attentive.
Switch ears: "I don't want you to think I don't appreciate ... " You're looking at Tillie
when you're saying she's not pretty. Fiddle with the chair, get up on "There'll be some
place for her. .. "
A: Can we go through it once?
[Go through blocking again]

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

C: Go ahead and be really cheery until you get cut off by him. A shift at, "Well some
days .... " At some point you can get up anywhere here.
A: Yeah, I think it's probably best at "But don't you worry about Matilda ... "
C; So let's just say the lines and remember the blocking ... don't worry about the acting"
[Run phone conversation again, with blocking]
C: Do you think you can remember it?
A: Yeah, sure.
C: Do you want to go through the blocking one more time?
A: Yeah, let's do it one more time.
[Phone conversation again, to run through blocking]
C: Let's give it a real go. Explore the dynamic range; she's faking it, she's effective, she
overreacts. Sustain the focus ... if you break it, don't wallow just get back on. You do
that by focusing on the objective.
[Start scene again with the blocking incorporated]
C: Okay stop ... very nice and natural. We want it to be fake ... remember how she
interacts with Nanny? Yon've never been aware of your social ineptitude. Try harder to
impress him, but also be thinking you're better than him. So let's try it again ...
[Scene, take 2!]
[stop] C: Okay, to give you an example ... what I'm having a problem with is I think your
vocal inflections are limiting the range of the character. Your vocal range when you're
acting is smaller than your normal vocal range. While it's very believable, we want a
theatrical quality to Beatrice. It's hard to play someone who's real but who's being
theatrical without you coming off as theatrical, which is difficult. Let me try to show you
your vocal inflections. It's kind ofin the same range and we have the same movement. A
possible interpretation could be ... [reading] See how we went wider?? This run I want
you to just kind of explore. Don't worry about believability, just go for any impulse that
strikes you. Take everything up a notch. Explore the vocal and emotional range .. .I want
you to reach the top and reach the bottom ... as big as you can make everything.
[Scene, take 3 !]
[stop] C: Okay, you're doing well, but bigger! That was good, though.
[Scene, take 4 1]
[stop] C: Okay, let's just work on varying that one line. "Mr. Goodman, 1 don't mean to
change the subject..."
Good, let's do another one: "Believe, me, she's nothing like that.. .. "

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

"I don't know what's the matter with women these ... "
You can do more with it, try it again.
[Running line again]
Okay we're still kind of following the same structure ... try something else. Try
emphasizing something else. It's like a rollercoaster.
You're separating it in the middle so it sounds like a poem. Don't pause
A: Oh yeah it rhymes!
A: [line]
A: Oh man that's worse it sounds like Dr. Seuss!
C: Stay away from the rhymes!
A: Ahhh I can't it's like poking me in the eye!
C: Okay let's do "Too much strain ... "
A: [line]
C: Okay good, take it more places. One thing you're not doing is varying the
pace ... you're changing the tone but you're not slowing down and speeding back up quite
as much. You can mumble or enunciate or mispronounce something. Are you
supporting, are you constricting or full? She's going to do different things. Your voice
changes depending on who you're talking to ... you're almost limitless with your
possibilities.
A: [running line]
C: Bigger bigger bigger!
A: [running line]
C: Good! Did you see how many ways there are to say it? Do you remember auditions
when we asked you to say the phrase "This evening" in as many ways as yon could?
A: Yeah I think I said it about 5 times
C; I got that idea from Stanislovsky's modern art theatre. If you were considered for
auditioning for it, yon had to say that phrase at least 40 different ways. We're used to
speaking in certain inflections, so even when I'm acting I'm acting in my reahn of
believable experience. Let's say I'm trying to think of a way to say "This evening." The
first thing I'm going to say is not going to be in the context of something I don't know
very well. People's ideas are common for a reason, because they're shared experiences
for a lot of people. So there are all different ways to approach it, and there are certain
ways that are characteristic to Beatrice.
There is a subset that's appropriate for Beatrice, so this is the time to explore the range
but make smart artistic choices. She is a mother of two children that she hates saying it
to an np-and-coming teacher at their high school so that limits it. You'll be able to feel
what kind of makes sense. I want you to think about Beatrice and think about the choices
that she makes. We want you and Beatrice to be one ... the only way she lives is through
you. Now, keep your range wide, explore it. You're going to have to make choices and
tl1en we'll tweak them.
[Take 51]
[stop] C: This isn't the decision run, it should be bigger! Start over.
[Take 6!]

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

[C: You got so much smaller, stay big']
C: Believe it or not that wasn't far from how we really want it to be. How did you feel
about it?
A: It felt fine, blocking's just still a little confusing. I feel better but I still think there's
more I can do to tweak ce1iain sentences.
C: let's do it again and I'll stop and start you this time, Ifl say "Bigger" just go back to
the last sentence you said. The reason we're doing this is so you can investigate the rest
of the play on yonr own. We need to figure out what we want the rest of the play to be
like. That's why we're doing this now ... I know you can make good choices, but we need
to put this in context of the whole play.
[Starting scene]
[stop] C: I want you to really call out, "Never any help" to make them feel bad. Also,
wait two more rings before you answer. [ starting again]
C: Stop ... "I hope there hasn't been any trouble ... " It's about more of a question than a
statement. Good though, especially with playing at the guilt factor more. Say "Will you
get that please" after the 3•·d ring and come out after the 4th . [starting again]
C: Okay, go back to "Hello ... " because the way you said "school" was too much.
[starting again]
A: Oh man 1 I can't do it!
C: Don't go up on the end!
A: Okay! Go down go down ... [line] Aahh, okay! [line]
C: You really want to go up on the end! Okay it is a question but don't go up on the end.
You're saying, it seems like a statement, but really you're asking the person. It's like
please confirm for me that this statement is correct.
A: [linel
C: Yes 1 That was the best. Start from "Hello"
[staring again]
C: Start again, more charm! "Delightful rabbit..."
[starting again]
C: Bigger! No you're not buttering him up, you're just stating.
C: Okay, we're losing the naturalism
A: I lost my focus on that one.
C: That's okay. We need to give you as many believable possibilities as we can. Beatrice
is dynamic, and the audience is going to have kind of free reign with her. Before you
were making smart artistic choices. This time, some of them were good and some of there
weren't. "Can I? ... " was not so good. I think you should go through the lines again and
again figuring out what works. Not so much from the perspective of sounding right, but
really wondering what Beatrice would say. In phone conversations you need to know
whaf s being said on the other side of the line. When he interrupts you, you know what
he's saying. Continue to look at possibilities, and narrow them down using the criteria of
what's believable for Beatrice. Think about the circumstances and how she feels. What
did she do this morning? You need to know where she's coming from and how she's
feeling. For example, "Oh she's always been like that ... " You're comfortable with that,

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

it's a normal conversation. Bnt you come and sit down when he asks you if you
encourage her, and when he says how intelligent she is. As you pointed out, some of it is
ironic because she's so sweet and the person on the other line would never !mow she's
not paying attention.
Opposition is one of the most difficult and most essential things for an actor to achieve. If
you can do it so that at any given point we feel a variety of emotions, that's stupendous
acting. Halle Berry is great in one scene in Monster's Ball when she's getting dnmk after
her son just died. She j usl starts going nuts and laughing and crying, talking about her
son. She complicates it even further because she has such a depth of emotion and so
much inner conflict. She feels so many things at once. When you're mad and throwing
everything around, it's just as intense. We need to see that you have opposition, and
you're conflicted. Beatrice is incredibly volatile ... she oscillates regularly. She changes
her position in a second to try to have the upper hand over her children. You always
commit to whatever Beatrice is going through, but there's always conflict and opposition
in a character. When you' re tearing down newspaper and putting up curtains, there are so
many emotions. You love your kids, you want to hurt your kids. You want Nanny gone,
but you feel responsible for her. She wants to tear her home down but she doesn't want
to tear it down. There are all of these thoughts going through her head ... she's conflicted
the entire time.
So I want you to focus on that. We want her to have a full range. We want Beatrice to be
extreme, because she has a lot of conflicting emotions that have to fit into a small space.
We can't limit her yet. Right now, pull and stretch her. Try different physicalites, try
changing your vocal inflections just to get to know her. Think about what she's going
through: what's her objective, what are her tactics, what's going through her head?
You can't sum up Beatrice in a single sentence, so don't start making too many choices
yet ... really explore. The moire oppositional elements you can feel, the better the
performance is going to be.
Let's go on to the second phone conversation. I'm not going to give you any instruction.
[Second phone conversation]
C: Okay, that was a little bit lifeless. It started off well, but it became kind of same note.
I want to do some textual analysis with you. Let's take it from "It does sound like an
interesting project, but..."
Let's look at the lines ... you're already very good at it in terms of pulling things out that
the playwright is doing, but I'd like to pull out character details, too. We want to !mow
how the person is: what's going on and what choices they're making.
"It does sound ... " What can we learn from that 9
A: I think she's cutting him off. .. she doesn't care about the project she just wants to
interject.
C: Exactly ... she's not trying to be respectful but she's pretending like she is. She is
interrupting him, so that give it an urgent quality. It's also going to be louder at the
beginning because you're talking over him. You'll want to confirm to him, "does" is
really the keyword there. I think he interrupts you again. The relationship is developing:
you're getting handles on each other. You're trying to get this out. When you're
interrupting someone you start off loud and fast. Maybe he quits around the "ing" of

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

"interesting" because he doesn't think you appreciate it. How about "At this very moment
I don't know .. .
A: I think she's resentfol, so she's probably irritated
C: yeah she's defensive. What docs that tell us about the choices for the line?
A: I think she's stressed.
C: That's one possibility. Why does she say no?
A: He asked her directly. That's not something she can dance around to make herself
seem intelligent. She's a bit embarrassed.
C: It's italicized for a reason ... she says it with some scorn. Good playwrights help you
out with clues. Look at all the alliteration in this. "I must admit at this very moment, I
don't know what a mutation is" People when they get mad, they start to pronounce their
consonants more. Macbeth's phrases become very consonant when he gets
angry ... Shakespeare used it. In addition to being defense, she's angry ... she' s being put
on the spot. It's your decision .. .is that the end and he keeps going, or does he intem1pt
you and define mutation? I think he interrupts her and starts defining.
A: Think she's like shut up, I don't care.
C: "I don't want you to think ... " What can we learn from that? It's offensive.
A: I know she should switch back to sugary sweet, so I think here she's still
offended ... shes still like, please spare me definitions over the phone, my time is so
valuable.
C: Where is the emphasis?
A: Spare me definitions.
C: That's good, try something else ... what's another way?
A: [line]
C: What's the best choice with the given clues?
A: [line J
C: Good ... ! think though, "not interested" should be pulled out. She's trying to be
polite .. .I think when you're trying to emphasize something you slow down. That's kind
of what she's doing. She wants to cut off the argument before it even happens. You're
making very sure that he knows how you feel.
A: [line]
C; Let's make the pause shorter between "shorter" and "but"
A: [line]
C: Soften the blow with "not interested." Now try to be nice, but you're mad. That was a
little too nice. This person has insulted you several times already.
A: [line]
C: Okay, how does the rest of that go? ''I'll go to the library ... ''
A: This is sarcasm.
C: What can we tell?
A: She's saying "some little book" like I'm so stupid I don't understand. She's saying
she's promising to do this so that you shut up.
C: It's dripping with sarcasm. But she's comparing herself to a little girl, so she's saying,
you' re making me feel like a child. That's the subtext to it. She's punching these words
out. That's kind of the vibe she's giving off. And he becomes apologetic because he's a
nice guy. Start with "Mr. Goodman ... "
A: [line J
1

'

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

C: Good! Angrier, though, for the whole thing. The pause is still too long.
A: [line]
C: Good! Even bigger and angrier. .. even more sarcasm.
A: [line)
C: Okay, you're restraining yourself with this line. She's conflicted on this line. She's
knows what she should do, she knows what she wants to do.
A: [line]
C: This should all come faster. He's been interrupting you.
A: [line]
C: Interrupt me!
A: [line]
C: Okay, more emphatic on the second portion of that. This is important to her. .. she
doesn't want people to think she's stupid. He should know that she's not.
A: [line)
C: Make me feel bad. I don't feel bad. Interrupt me, get me to stop.
A: [line]
C: That was better! Let's keep going.
A: She's trying to redeem herself by saying, this is my intention.
C: Exactly. What does that remind you of? It sounds like a parent, doesn't it? "Prevention
is better than a tragedy" It's like an authority. It's firm but it's not sarcastic or as cruel.
Then she's making him feel guilty. "Matilda has enough problems without sterility."
Why's that italicized again?
A: It's like, how bad would you feel if my daughter was sterile?
C: Exactly, malce him feel like shit. Sterility ... that would be your fault. Then yon're just
dripping with love and affection: so fake.
So, we're going to go back to, "No it must have been ... "
A: [line]
C: The second part has go to be meaner and more sarcastic. Let's go back to the second
part.
A: [line)
C: Too act-y ...just try to save face.
A: [line)
C: More defensive. More emphatic ... put your foot down.
A: [line)
C: I didn't believe the second sentence, make me feel guilty.
A: [line]
C: Sterility was overemphasized, but better. Do it again.
A: [line]
C: There we go.
A: [line]
C: "Poor mother's heart ... " Return to the Nanny-esque speech.
A: [line)
C: Even drippier.
A: [line]
C: So fake ... wonderfol. Did you see how we looked at the text? You need to do this with
your entire script. When Carly says something to you, why do you respond in one way

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

and not another? What else could I have said and why didn't I say it that way? I'm
making word choices that reflect me right now. That's why writers have styles; she has a
style. Beatrice has a certain perception of reality, and all that's evident through her
choices. It's up to you what those choices are, and to align yourself with those choices.
You're making Beatrice's choices to cause Beatrice's desired effects. Small statements
are easy to miss ... why does someone say "uh"? Even small words like "No" tell us that
it's a question. What words are receiving emphasis ... can multiple words get emphasis?
All of the questions tell us about her and why she's Beatrice, and why she's not someone
else. Obviously you need your script to do this, but think about Beatrice. If you're
walking somewhere, think about Beatrice ... she should be your best friend. Go over the
choices and scenarios ... create history for her. Who is she, why is she that way? How is
that transformed into action?? When you can think about her, think about her. It doesn't
need to distract from the other things that you're doing.
[Break]
[Ilana, Sydney, & Arn1ie]
C: We're going to do the first scene with Nanny, Beatrice is looking at the newspaper.
What we're going to be doing is getting on point ... we're going to go through it once for
you to figure out what's going on, but then we're going to stop and start to get it as close
to perfect as we can. I'm not going to stop you this time. Commit to it, though. Each
time we come back to a scene we're going to lose something ... we want to lose as little as
possible each time. Take a second to go over it. Commit to everything. Commit to the
extre1nes.

A: Where are we going until?
C: Through your half-life speech.

["I thought we had everything ... " scene, pg. 5: Tillie, Beatrice, Nanny]
C: What did you think about that?
S: For me, I wasn't very into it so when I'm not feeling it I can't expect other people to
cornrnnnicate with me.
A: I got really thrown off a couple times, and I just wasn't into it at all. I realized that
they weren't reacting to me and they were just saying things.
C: That's something that happens ... if a bug catches, it can spread through the entire cast.
That's why everyone needs to be cotlllllitted to conversation.
C: What happened?
S: We were all in our own world. I wasn't hearing anything, I think I blocked it all out.
C: I have a question ... who's tired? Who has a lot of stuff on their plate? Who's excited to
come to rehearsal?
A: I am excited, but tonight I can't. . .it's all corning to a head and I can't just put
everything on hold.
C: Because of everything that's going on right now, it's getting harder and harder to
concentrate on this show. It becomes like, what are all of the other things I could do with
these 4 hours? I think what was wrong was that we weren't excited to do it, and to be

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

these people. I don't think we were loving the characters. As much work as you have,
you get the opportunity to create. You've probably heard people say this before, that art
saves. This is still a place where you can come and relax, where you can come and not
be yourself for awhile, which don't ever take that for granted. You can come be with
friends, where you get to have fun and where you get to work on something you will be
very proud of. When you come in, we don't have time to start off with warm-ups. As
soon as you walk in the door, there is nothing outside of this room. The scenes will look
like this otherwise.
We're all stressed, but there's nothing we can do about it here. Have fun. This should be
a joy, and I'm a firm believer that you make of things what you want. If this a burden to
you, then that's what it's going to be. !fit's an opportunity to save yourself, if it's a place
to be safe, then it's very different. You come here to work and to play; be proud leaving
this room. Have fun and love your characters. Acting is nothing short of a
blessing ... you all know that, don't ever forget it.
[Run scene again]
[stop] C: Start over, talk to each other. Give me energy!
[Take 2!]
C: You forgot what we talked about. Annie. You're still looking at the newspaper until
you become completely sarcastic at, "While you're at it. .. "
C: I don't believe you have separate thoughts. Place yourself in the setting ... what's
going through your head?
[3]
C: Make her feel guilty
[4]
C: Really ask, Tillie. Beatrice, give me energy.
[5]
C: Okay ... "lt's something that causes ... " You realize your morn's notthat smart. Then
you get so excited, I want you to lose your breath.
[6]
C: Okay, what else is missing?
S: Purpose?
C: No, it's even more surface level.
I: Eye contact?
C: Humor. Where'd the humor go? Have fun with this, let's try it again.
S: Do you want me to look up when she says, "Nanny'"?
C: No, I don't want you to react at all. This should really be humorous ... this is what you
do, this is your life. Sarne thing with the beginning, it starts off funny. You are so
sarcastic. Don't forget the humor. Let's start from the beginning again.
[7]
C: Stop' You're in a real living room, thiuk about that. I don't believe that you' re sitting
and working on plants ... 1 don't believe that you're reading the newspaper. This is a real
morning. There should be a quality of silence to this. We're not always talking to our
parents when we're around them ... you feel the most comfortable with them, you've been

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

around them your whole life. The quality of silence isn't in this scene yet ... you're
filling up space. You're kind of making conversation. You stop for awhile ... the silence
can be half an hour. If you ask something, it's genuine. This is a real morning and a real
living room. Start over.
[8]
C: Pretty good. The pauses were a little too long, because we are onstage. We don't
want people to think you forgot your lines. But much better.
[9]
C: Okay ... does she answer you? Did Annie answer you?
I: She answers me because she's silent
C: Yeah that's in the script. .. did you feel like you got an answer from her? Her decision
to ignore you is still a decision. Do you think she made it or went on to her next line?
Place yourself in a given circumstance. This is your science fair project...you're very
excited about it.
I: Can I say please on the end so that it's like I'm asking?
C: Yeah, definitely. Annie, a little too deadpan when you're talking about the plants.
But you have the right idea. Let's start again.
[l OJ
C: Not funny, it's got to have more energy, more emphasis.
[I I l
C: Annie, were you really thinking about what you could do with 8 garages??
A: No, I wasn't.
C: If you don't see it, we don't believe that you see it. Ilana are you touching plants right
now?
I: Yeah. They're kind of waxy.
C: You need to know details about everything you're doing. That's the kind of attention
to detail we need. There's so much junk in this room, you have to step over everything.
Tillie brought in dirty plants. What a dump.
[ I 2]
C: I do not believe you. Put your scripts away. Let's go back to improv.
[Take 13: Improved: Killing Nanny off]
C: That was the best one I Because you didn't know what was going to happen ... you
didn't know what was going to come next. Why is the script any different? Because you
know what's going to come next? No, you don't. You can't lose that spontaneity. The
way that Annie says a line could make you change everything. It's really something
that's not unnatural to theatre. It's the same thing as when it's really happen. A lot of
theorists think that we come to see theater and film because we don't have to make
choices. That's why it's entertainment: you don't have to be involved. It's a position of
power to be in the audience, you get to watch. It's escapism, it's not having to make
choices. Being up onstage is scary and volatile. We're just amplifying this. We're not
starting with new first principles; this is the nature of theater. Yesterday, when Ilana said
to Carly "I don't think that's very nice" she said it almost like an authority, because she
was in the moment. Carly was making fantastic choices physically in the chair. She's
such an excited person she can't sit still. That was a decision she made on her own, and
she got frustrated with the chair because the chair couldn't keep up with her. You will
never run out of choices or opportunities. Choices, choices, choices, that's what it's

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

about. That's what made this successful, you were making choices. If you know how
you're going to say a line, you're already anticipating.
[14: Improved]
C: Good, get your scripts ... do it again.
[ I 5]
[Ruth ... entering scene. Chris Burns kissed her ➔ running away]
C: Okay, some bumps but some nice discoveries. Carly, I like that you brought up love.
Do you ever tell them you love them and do they ever ask?
We're jumping to the scene with Annie and Carly.
[Start scene: "Get back in your room! ... "]
C: How did that feel?
A: It's gotten better.
C: Yeah, this scene went better than the last scene. I want to perfect it a little bit more,
but we really need to see it in the context of a full run.
C: Are you upset?
A: Frustrated.
C: Why are you frustrated? What's the hardest thing for you?
A: Becoming this person. The more we keep doing this the more frustrated I become,
and I know when I'm not. I don't know how to get there.
C: What's been successful?
A: Sometimes it's easy for me to lose my concentration, and once I do it's really hard to
get back into it.
C: What do you mean by keeping the character?
A: I can connect with certain emotions but I'm not connecting with it as three
dimensionally as I should. I'm just really frustrated.
C: The main thing is that you can tell you're upset because your energy level is lower and
the choices aren't as strong. This is a leap for you ... you come from little theater
experience to a challenging role. It was a big decision to choose who could be Beatrice.
A simple person can't play a complex role. You are passionate, so you can connect with
emotional force. You're closer to Beatrice than you think. I think the greatest hindrance
to acting is character. We have·to be so conscious that we're performing as another
human being. I've emphasized the otherness. I want you to think, though, that Beatrice
only gets to talk from you; it's just as much self as it is the other.
The self comes to consciousness through acknowledging the other. The self appropriates
the other from the moment ofrecognition. You're viewing Beatrice as a pure other, but
she's not: she's channeled through you. Don't make it so hard on yourself. Don't put up
so many barriers. We're defining this person ... that doesn't mean she's any more difficult
to connect with. You're finding out more about her and that can be intimidating, but
don't overcomplicate the issue.
If you want to be a great actor, you should relax and just do it. If you need to ask Tillie a
question, just ask her. In saying a line and trying to be a character, it's more forced.
People onstage think that they have to do something. We defined performance as
exerting more energy, and, in many cases, being viewed. Don't think so much about
being viewed. Instead of focusing the energy on being viewed, it's being focused on

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

performance. You should think about the character, her wants, her impulses, her history,
but once you're onstage, you should forget them, in a way. You should act within them,
so you don't have to remember them. Just do it.
You're getting so many thoughts in your head that you can't function. Learn enough
about Beatrice so that you don't have to think about Beatrice wheu you're onstage.
Why does it need to be so hard? Because you have a script. .. because you' re saying
words that aren't your own? I guarantee you've said every word in this play. All
language is re-combination. A script shouldn't be this impossible barrier. You need to
think about the script and the character offstage. Think about your choices offstage, but
when you come on it shouldn't be difficult. You shouldn't have to fight with yourself
during the performance.
I see you working very hard and I appreciate your effort, but forget about it. ThinJc about
Ilana being your daughter and just ask her. She's a complex enough character that she
changes. Beatrice turns on a dime. You need to commit to those forces. All of your
efforts should go into asking Tillie a question and then insulting her. So many actors want
directors to hold their hands. And so many directors are willing to oblige them. Directors
shouldn't hold actors hands or help them piece together a performance. Ifs about taking
inhibitions away so you can be free. It's about coming up here and just doing it ... that's
how you'll be able to respond to the audience and other people. Onstage, it's Beatrice
through you. You should only be concentrating on the moment. .. don't think about
what's going to happen or what has to happen. That's what you're doing in improv.
There are all these mental barriers that keep you from being able to just do it. Take them
down. Acting is the most difficult thing in the world, because it should be the easiest.

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

APPENDIXE
ACTOR JOURNAL
Ilana Millner, "Tillie"
Thursday September 21 ·st , 2006
Supposed to write in this last night, I know. But, I was exhausted, and feeling too alive.
MATILDA What is it with that name? The trunchbull, purple newt's hopping motions.
Small raggedy dolls, salad fingers, else's wing, lynette, Pittsburgh, small girl with
magical powers. ADA. Ada and her palindromes.
Science is an escape. Science is THE escape.
Ada says, Ada says to me:
"In organic chemistry, invertebrate zoology, and the inspired symmetry of Mendelian
genetics, I have found a religion that serves."
pg.409
SHE SAYS
"Now I understand, God is not just rooting for the dollies. We and our vermin all
blossomed together out of the same humid soil in the Great Rift Valley, and so far no one
is really winning. Five million years is a long partnership. If you could for a moment rise
up out of your own beloved skin and appraise ant, human, and virus as equally
resourceful beings, you might admire the accord they have all struck in Africa."
pg. 529
SHE SAYS

Thursday September 21 st , 2006
MOVE. She says MOVE. Up and down and all around. Touch the ground. Make a
sound.
There is a little place inside me, a little space inside me, a little face inside me, a
different pace inside me. Saul Williams wrote about music changing your heart literally. Transforming its beat. But WHAT IS MY BEAT') What is HER beat? Do I need
to change it at all? Do I even have one.
I thought I would cry. Lying there on the ground, the dust scattered brown ground, the
darkness around me and a million bugs crawling through my brain. Cry because I missed
myself and suddenly realized there were things I didn't know where missing.
What is Tillie missing? What is she gaining? If she cannot see the back of her skull, can
I not either?
What is it to know?
Sometimes I drown. Drown in the laughter, or the pain or the moment. I kind of think it's
all the same. And in the end, it's only after that I realize I CAN breathe. That I should.
That I want to.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

A LITTLE PHOTOGRAPH in my brain:
Green dress with watercolor Paris, button top, sylvan background, tiny feet, clean clean
clean.
Dancing. Not to any thing at all. Singing too. Picking up ants, walking, feeling, toes,
hands, sun.
But I'm looking at myself. This has me. A memory. But I'm no longer IN it. How can it
be mine? What changed?
We have this urge to posess. To posess the moment. What if you can posess nothing but
the moment you are in? Who owns your memories" What if you surrender them?
WHAT THEN" Who do you become? What do you become? Do you LOSE or GAIN?
Must you let go to get out? Or should you hold on tighter?
I DON'T KNOW THE BACK OF MY HAND.
but then again, I kind of enjoy the anticipation of meeting it one day- in all its glory.

Sunday September 24 1\ 2006
It is rather odd to feel like you are not what you were for a very long time. I've changed
and I don't know how it/when it/why it happened.
I want to connect, to let down my guard, to FEEL that bond. I'm still standoffish
though. There is something holding me back and I'm going crazy trying to figure it out.
I'm embarrassed by the sister scene. I knew the character too well. It was like the
painter friend in Dorian Gray - terrified of displaying his masterpiece portrait because he
was so afraid the world would see inside his soul. I really wasn't acting. Or maybe,
maybe I'm always acting. Sydney became Stephanie. Maybe it isn't Stephanie. Ifl can
do the same things, say the same things, feel the same things, know the same pain, be
consumed by the same bitter hatred- ALL OF IT - all of it without her there. It isn't her
then.
It's me.

I'm afraid of playing Tillie. I'm afraid I won't be able to be her. I'll feel like a phony
(LOL Holden Caufield), something won't work. I have lost the Tillie inside me. I was
her. Maybe I wasn't. I wanted to be her. Maybe I was.
I am threatened by the goodness of my character. I am threatened by anyone and
everyone because I am afraid they will be better at being me then I could ever be. Caleb
talked about the EXISTANT and EXISTENCE. Usually I feel like others can exist for
me. I don't own it. Similar people frighten me because I'm afraid I won't be good enough
to compare - they will be MORE of me than me. What I thought was miue is really
theirs.
"Whoops! You've been living a lie. You've been copying."
This gets in the way of connection.
I'd like to talk to Tillie. For once, I'd like to be able to connect, to identify, to share, to
rejoice in ourselves and to OWN MY SELF. To know it's mine. To see her, to see me,
and to see the difference. To just not think about it. That's kind of always the problem
though.
Damn thinking.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

STAIRS, STAIRS, STAIRS, STAIRS, STAIRS, STAIRS, STARES
Stairs/stares all around.

Monday September 25'\ 2006
It hurts so much. That feeling that comes. The one you need and miss and want and pray

for, and yet never really understand.
How can you want something you cannot imagine? I am afraid of not !mowing and
never knowing and missing and falling and just not !mowing.
Are you dead and I don't know it?
I was.
It hurts.
small chocking pain tightens tightens,
grips, grasps clutches pulls, strangles, bums
a million little pieces of pain and worry and
need and sorrow - all congregate to make as
one mass - to surge forth from your throat
like the most violent purge of heart and soul
in the history of man. in the history of life. in the
history of mass. in the history of meaning.
and yet, just before it leaves, it transforms. and I cry
instead and I love instead and I'm saved instead.
to the edge and back, to the edge and back, to the edge and back,
and I love instead.
They love instead. They love me. I love them. We love instead. It is the only thing that
can change you.
It is the only thing that can change me.
I never want to lose it. Why don't I work for it? I feel so lucky, so lucky to find these
moments. Spectacular beauty and purpose and life.
it hurts, and it is the most beautiful pain in the world.
a perfect balance
everything and everything
completion
breathe because it was all worth it
breathe because each day is worth it
breathe. because life is worth it.
It is worth it.
3 years lost. 3 years to make up for. 3 years of emotion. Can I ever regain it? Maybe this
is better. So lucky, it hurts. So blessed, it hurts.

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

These women amaze me. They are role models like I've never had. I have a hard time
understanding how my world moved forward without them, and without this.
How can we grow so much in the space of a moment?
How can we not?
grey sweatshirt, alex perotti, missed phone calls, crazy beat, Sydney's feet, purple flower,
locust walk, posters, red, heart, shirt letters, enveloping !-shirt, am1ie, kind eyes, pink
toes, bald head, intense gaze, fidgeting hands, choking, steaphnie, dirty white socks,
peacock, wall, kiley, math, Jove, circle, women, like, hope, connection, fear, wall, circle,
love, home, penn, home, soy crisps, wawa, bum, election note, Hill cafeteria, Dan, fear,
hip bones, cat, tongue, blue bed spread.
A CIRCLE. A BOND. A CIRCLE.
An atom.
What a beautiful word.
Yes Tillie, I do agree. What beautiful words. What beauty.

Tuesday September 26'\ 2006
Not really feeling the connection today, worried about the election, about focus, about
achievement, about friendship, about family, about selfishness, about falsity, about pain.
Jenny is wonderful. It amazes me every day how genuine and affectionate she is. My
immediate reaction is to feel threatened, to feel less, to feel worse, to feel like an
imposter: LOOK THERE, she is the REAL thing. YOU, you are but a facsimile, a
reflection, an imitation, a confused wam1abe.
But I' II fight that. I'm not sure Tillie would feel that way. What innocence, what
strength does she have that I have forgotten about?
The best things/ the happiest things/ the most wonderful things terrify me.
It'd be nice, it'd be nice (I keep thinking again and again) to just not worry about that.
To see it. To see it and breathe.
Is anything really a compromise of the 'self? What is the distinction between that and a
change?
Face paint. So odd to touch. So foreign. I see faces every day, but never REALLY feel
them. I hug, I kiss, I touch, I massage - but the face is off limits.
It's still a struggle - this interaction. It used to be high fives - couldn't even do that.
Now it's just a constant battle. DON'T RETREAT. STAY THERE. FORGE AHEAD.
There are some sins I am afraid of- not afraid to do, but afraid to portray. What makes
me able to convey envy, but stops me from touching lust? Why is one 'sin' more off
limits? I don't believe in sins. I only believe in actions. Sin implies that you've done

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

something wrong - I just think you've done something that has changed you. Changed
changed changed me.

Wednesday September 27'', 2006
It is hard to under perform, but I know it's good for me. To constantly have to keep
proving myself, to keep improving myself. Not in the hateful way, but in the growing
way.
It hurt to fuck up. I felt inadequate, especially because I feel so blessed and lucky to be
here. And because I really respect these women, aud their talent, and their passion, and
their love, and their kindness and their generosity. And Caleb's too. Laird still seems
removed. I hope he' 11 change.
Stream of consciousness was more difficult for me than it usually is. It is funny how
everything related to that has been harder for me in here. Usually it just comes out.
Maybe this is more real than anything else, maybe it's more important.
It is such a risk to share. But more of a risk to hold back. I never regret, but I do worry
what others will tlrink of the decisions I'm making. The person I'm becoming changing
learning to love.
I worry that people will get sick of me. Kiley. How can I play some roles so well, and
fail so miserably at others? 2 nights ago, I WAS the ultimate character, the ultimate me.
This morning, I was an awkward approximation. Same person, same bodies, same
lifetime, same place. What changes?
It is so hard to hold things together. I'm worried about school. I'm not doing well on
tests. Because I'm not studying. I'm tallcing and laughing and loving and learning, but I
AM NOT STUDYING. I am afraid of getting kicked out. I makes me feel stupid. I love
education. But somehow, class is not education. I learn every moment of the day except
the 2, 3, 4, 5 hours I am in class. It's the people. I want to connect with them all. It's like
Tillie, talks about the atom. The atom in everything, in all ofus, in me.
What a beautiful word.
What a beautiful life.
What a beautiful process.
What a beautiful opportunity.
ATOM
What a beautiful word.

Sunday October 1st , 2006
Tired, tired, tired, tired.
I really can't get a handle on Tillie. Is she angry? ls she happy? When she's just sitting
around at home - is she content''
Is there malice in her voice? What does she think of Beatrice? Does she MANAGE her
mother?
Is Tillie a caretaker, or does she just watch? So awkward, so many questions.
I really want to crawl into bed and listen to SAMSON.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

cigarettes and autumn air.
you have a soul, carry a spare
leave if you forgot your fare
it's be a fair fair process.
Congregation synagogue, foreign tropes.
Topography of the vocal range.
God is a character.
laundry
weakness
pitiful
condescending
slightly sinister
Monday October 2nd , 2006
Tillie, Tillie, TO TILL. Look up the definition. I have an inkling.
To till, to sow, to reap, to grow.
The plants. Ada.
What is it again? Remember from art class a million years ago: white is the absence of all
color? Black is the presence? I think it might be the other way around. FOR TILLIE:
monotone/unemotional/constant/calm~ the presence of all emotion - everything. The
extremes of expression are rigid and one-dimensional. There is everything in every word,
in every world, in every particle, in every atom of Tillie.
It is hard to look at Annie as a mother. I disconnect from my mother. I shut down. Hang
up the phone, go blank, take the love out ofmy voice. I can't connect with Annie.
Barrier, blockade, tension.
Easier with Carly. But I'm so used to roles reversed. Maybe I should talk to my sister.
Do a little "character study." What an absurd and cruel thought.
CALCULUS. Sushi, bagel, white fish, Christian, Alan, Kate, Kiley, leg, pen, duck,
quad, stars.

rd

Tuesday October 3 , 2006
SUCCESS. I felt Tillie. I don't know where Laird came up with the "Thank you" bit, but
it was PERFECT. It was her.
She just kind of jumped out of my throat, didn't even have to force it. The volume
helped. I prefer being loud. Loud things excited me - or the very softest ones.
She shocks herself. What have I done to shock myself? SO MANY THINGS. I shock
myself every day. Shock shock shock. Electro-shock therapy. Stay awake, keep alive,
keep that heart beating. The key is to find new shocks, new sparks, new static electricity.
SHOCKING. Little atoms colliding.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Wednesday October 4'\ 2006
Stuck. Stuck like a bug on a mg. Poor Tillie. Poor Beatrice, Ruth, Tillie, Nanny. Poor
world. I don't really feel part of the family- but maybe that is appropriate, Tillie isn't
like them. Tillie isn't like herself. Tillie is the universe.
The universe is Tillie.
THE UNIVERSE.
What is Tillie's song? Everyone has a song. What is Tillie 0 How does her song change?
My song was - my song was - my song was - my song was.
My song changed.
Plants to ants to pants. Rants, chants, cants, slants. Ada's slant. What is Tillie's slant?
What does she chant 9 What CAN'T?
sitting. sipping, crying. dying.
THE END.

1

Wednesday October 11 \ 2006
Felt pretty good. Pretty good. "Maybe someday you will be pretty."
How would that feel? Does Tillie even care about that? Do I even care about that? YES.
YES. Yes I do.
So tired though. Freeze was uncomfortable. I like how close Paula seems. That is very
brave of her.
Interesting phenomenon: I was actually really annoyed with Sydney. A friend, a
boyfriend, a someone has died. He committed suicide. Tommy Coletti. She wasn't being
real. Maybe she was. I felt defensive. I didn't want to act out the scene. Too close to
home. I didn't know how to behave in real life, how was I supposed to know how to
behave onstage?
Remember the morning. Graduation. College, happiness, relief. Audito1ium seats.
Rough red checkered/plaid/familiar. Blue. Not red, blue. Bethany Marvel in front of me.
She always had such a tight smile. Crinkly eyes. Gaze that passed slowly like a turtle's
head.
I saw her deflate. The robot spoke in her monotone voice. She announced death,
welcomed him into our lives. That crinkled, sporty, vibrant, tight, brown, straight,
straight buck, athletic gate, tomboy - DEFLATE.
Maybe I should be more cautious in the future. Remember that people actually go
through these things, go through life. Go through a suicide.
Tommy Colleti: Remember him.

Thursday October 12'\ 2006
"You are what you love, and not what loves you back" - cause we live in a house of
m1rrors.
Oh, Jermy Lem's and the Watson Twins.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

For some reason this song has been stuck in my head all day. It is good to escape.
Fucking midterms. Feeling stupid, embarrassed, apathetic, brush it off- I really don't
care. Maybe that is the trouble. I need something I care about. CARE about.
I care about the science fair. It is easy to forget. Tillie/me cares about: Mr. Goodman,
atoms, plants, purpose, Ruth, Beatrice, the texture of the rug, germs on her hands, the boy
who reads during the atom cranking, Peter, Nanny, her father, the principal, dirt in the
backyard, piles, spaces, vast expanse, books, smiles, quiet, laughter, passion, discovery,
hope, care, things beyond my reach ... the way Peter eats food.
TILLIE HATES: (nothing, but dislikes much)
-loud voices
-darkness (the newspapered window kind)
-wooden spoons
-NO.
-unnatural death
WHAT ELSE?
It's like reading the monologue over and over - out come the lines, out come the words,
out come the intention, out comes the passion, out comes the noise ... BUT WHERE IS
TILLIE? When does SHE come out of me? My knowledge of her is frustrating- it is too
little. She is like that person you find intriguing, but never get to know. Tillie and I need a
date.
Monday October 161\ 2006
Tired. Tired tired tired. That sun-ea! world where Alice falls down the rabbit hole. It's
like falling down your thoughts. Suddenly, your ideas stretch- like thin gooey strings of
cheese - oozing, falling, dripping, sliding and dangling as you too slide along.
That is what the sleep world is like. Tillie, onstage, sitting. Sitting. Sitting. Start to
numb out. I know I'm tired, my whole body pulls me towards the floor, my eyelids are in
an apocalyptic struggled with gravity, my bones ache and moan and sing low funeral
dirges. Hunger rumbles in my stomach, but it feels more like rocks being tumbled in one
of those amateur scientist/geologist rock tumbler kits. (Just like the magic school bus one
Steph got for her 51h birthday, replete with fake rocks covered in fake dirt - all tropical
pinks yellows and purples).
You don't need drugs to send you into hallucinations, to pnll you away, to trip your
mind up, to connect this and that and life and death and conscious and subconscious - all
you need is a little bit of time, a stage, a character, an overwhelming tiredness, a need to
stay awake, a fear, a cast, a director, a brain, an ass to sit on.
All things fall apart.
We played hide and seek and I couldn't find Tillie.

Sunday October 15 1\ 2006
Apples and honey. Honey from Wawa, apples from orchards. Sometimes you ueed a little
something. HOTSY WATER. HOTSY TOTSY.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Thursday October 19'\ 2006
Bad job? I don't really know how to feel about that. 1 feel kind of angry, kind of
defensive. No one said it was bad, but once the idea was thrown out there - the seed
planted ... BAD.
Fucked up the last line. Fucked it up. So sad. Bad recovery. Tommy said it was scary
how comfortable I was in the role. What does that mean') Good or bad?
Things are awkward. It is hard to look out to the "audience." I really wish I had plants
and props - it feels so fake.
OVERALLS/TURTLENECKS.

Tuesday October 24'", 2006
SAFETY MEETING. Safety.
Do you feel safe at home Tillie?
What is the boundary between me and my character. I didn't feel safe sitting up there.
No one can really understand what is outside of themselves. We all want to. We all
pretend to, but in the end. we are. just. ourselves. That is all we are left with in the end.
The business of living and maintaining and keeping things straight is ahnost too
consunung.
Energy energy energy.
I really don't want to answer those questions. I don't like answering questions anymore.
It feels like I'm whoring my life out. MY LIFE.
MINE.
He's all mine. He belongs to all ofus.
Mine mine mine mine
Does he really mean that much to you?
Does life really mean that much to you?
YES.

1

Wednesday October 25 ", 2006
I like to improve a lot more. Much less stressful.
Joints. Knife. Stress on the joints ...
Pottruck - joints and knees and tense leg muscles.
Tense heart muscles. Hands heart legs, brain.
TENSE.
Air sucked out oflungs.
Alone and lonely and plants and eating alone.
Slow it down, speed it up slow it down.
High low high low high low high low.
Odd to be watched. Eyes in the walls.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Eyes like coal.
Full fathom fire
The Poisonwood Bible
Ada
Funny how it all comes around again.
Beginning to end.
Ashes to ashes.
He took the ruins of Babylon - the dust of Babylon, and put it all into the [illegible].
Take my life, bnndle it up. Put it in a box. Put it in a dorm, put it in a quad. Put it in a
school.
PUT IT IN A SCRIPT.
Funny grilled cheese sandwich t-shirt.
Saw it at a feat. Fnnny funny.
Fnnny how Tillie has recently made one angry because I have to tend to her instead of
Homecoming.
I have ALWAYS, my entire LIFE, wanted to fully enjoy homecoming. I feel like
Beatrice with the science fair.
Funny how my decisions have consequences. Tillie would never go to Homecoming.

Thursday October 26'\ 2006
TILLIE SAYS:
She's really scattered. Up down up down here there all over the place. I think she
understands - she seems to see it. Sitting in Mr. Goodman's class I think she'd feel the
spark. But sometimes, she's just gone.
I am a constant. An invariable. A standard. A fixed dot. She is uncharitable, constantly
changing, constantly reinventing, constantly falling. I can see the cosmos, she can only
glimpse them.
When mama yells at me, I take it. I take it, hold onto it, examine it, touch it, mold it,
fold it, set it down, pick it up. Then I tuck it away. I tuck it away and I'm okay. I don't
judge, I don't hate, I don't hurt, I don't misinterpret. All I do is look and find what it
really is. Ilana feels too much. She sees the big picture and then instantly zooms in. She
talks the talk but can only crawl.
She harbors a hatred, a burden, a grudge, a festering wound. No matter how many times
she talks a bandaid into existence - no matter how many times she buries the dead thing she keeps picking off the scab. Digging it up. Picking and digging in her sleep.
And when it starts to bleed- it's always a surprise again.
I'm not really surprised. I know that I can't know. I know that there will always be a
mystery beyond me. Ilana can't accept that. She is depressed by it, lessened by it,
threatened by it. She loves the mystery but craves a solution. She feels stupid when she
doesn't know. I just feel amazed.
She needs to sit a little more. She is so afraid of missing something she can hardly
enjoy what she has. A minute with my plants - that is something she has rarely ever

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

experienced. Full commitment, foll meditation, full relaxation, foll concentration. She
understands it, she understands it all on some level. But she's at all different levels. Old
since she was young, too young to be old. Socially retarded. Socially stunted. Missing
years. Surplus of tears/fears.
She watches the clock. I am the clock.
If Ilana were my age, we could be friends. She was me. She had more life though. She
was a fighter. Now-I don't think she'd see me.
She sees too much.
Sunday October 29 11\ 2006
SO FUCKING TIRED.
The days never end. Rather, the DAY never ends. I no longer believe in a difference
between night and day, work and play, act and say ... ANYTHING.
It is all one, we are all one. The boundaries we put up, like "morning, noon, and
night," "friend colleague, classmate, stranger," "minute, second, day, month, year, hour"

- they mean nothing outside of the context we give them and the emphasis we place on
them. Step outside ofit. Hop on out of the box. Laugh until you cry and your abdomen
hurts and you roll on the ground.
So silly how we run around like chickens with our heads chopped off.
Tonight - it was all worth it. All of it. I felt like we belonged together, like I belongedwas an integrate part. I have a place. Bubble letters are my favorite (and I feel so proud to
do them).
I NEED MORE ART.
I NEED TO CREATE.
I completely understand Tillie. Her voice still doesn't sound right, but I fil'.l her.
"Just let me keep them here for a week or so, until they get started, and then I' II
transplant them to the backyard."
FUCK THIS LINE
No time. No time. No time.
So false. So rehearsed. Fuck it.
Aunt Delfene, Mom, Dad, Hannah, Rise, Abby, LA, EVERYONE.
Oh dear.
Oh my goodness.

FUCK.

Monday October 3011\ 2006
Tick tock tick tock. Houston Hall fireplace. Back rub. A little family. Embittered.
Diligent. Art thou speaketh savour words little banner - rap lyrics.
Tripping over the rabbit cage. Rage. Page, Sage. Cage - closed in, cannot access
Tillie. Fucking comments.
Rage - Sam. Sam. Grades. Math. Disconnect. Give up to take in to spit out.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Page - not reading, not listening,, ,LIVES? God help me.
Sage - who knows what's wise anymore?
Sage rosemary and thyme. LOL
TIME - there is no such thing.
Backscratch. Right under the bra strap. That's what LOAD-IN felt like. The perfect
solution to every problem I didn't know I had.
black and white clothing= a black and white life
EAT/SLEEP
ACT/SLEEP
STUDY/SLEEP
REHEARSE/SLEEP
SLEEP?
Tillie still isn't there. It is me doing a bad job acting. The only thing that sounds REAL
AUTHENTIC TILLIE= the voiceover.
I love it
Smile.

Tuesday October 31 st
Can't say the puzzle did it - but maybe it helped.
Getting hit by the glass shard (I should say ceramic) may have been the tipping point
I still need to read that book
I was really afraid. For the first time, I was really afraid.
That is the problem with loving too much and twisting too much - Annie doesn't scare
me. She did at first, but she doesn't now. I respect her too much.
An variable - it changed things.
Annie is Annie is Annie - - - But glass shards (?)
They have a life of their own.
Atoms exploding, flinging off tiny bullets, atom after atom, each one breaking down into
something
NEW
It was a new scene for the first time. A NEW scene Halloween.
Too much candy. Economics, calculus, school.
Sometimes I DO just want to stay home from school.
But not really.
Midnight - my birthday is a week from tomorrow.
Beatrice and birthday candles.
I'm nervous for this to end. Will I still see everyone? Will I retreat inside myself'? Will I
lose the connection? Will I become an annoyance? A disappointment?
Overwhelmed, underwhelmed
Hern. Hern up my life. Shorten, neaten,

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Straighten. Enjoy wearing it more. Wear my life. Favorite pair of jeans. So f-ucking feel
good.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

APPENDIXE
ACTOR JOURNAL
Carly Daucher, "Ruth"
9/20/06
I've started to fonn this weird attaclnnent to Ruth already. Last night I began to describe
a scene from Gamma Rays to my roommate - it was when Ruth sort of exposes her
mother to all the ridicule she had been hiding from. Not exactly a shining moment for
Ruth. My roonunate was appalled, started talking about how interesting it would be for
me to play a monster, someone so antithetical to myself.
I immediately began to backpedal. I came running in to Ruth's defense and started listing
all the reasons why Ruth deserves to be so very monstrous to others.
Maybe I ought not to defend her so much, because she does do some unspeakable things
to others. But I just think if someone stepped in somewhere and loved her, she wouldn't
be such a miserable disaster. Staring into Jenny's face today was the best part. How often
do we really look that closely at someone else?
Did anyone ever look that way at Ruth? I've been thinking about Jenny's mouth
twitching and wondering what kind of tells my face displays, and how many there are on
Ruth's.
I wonder if she has any scars from the seizures. I wonder how much she dies inside every
time her morn makes taunting reference to her "problem." I wonder if her face falls, or if
she just gets a little harder on the inside. Does that happen every week? Every day? (This
is silly, but there's a very lighthearted song on right now that reminds me simultaneously
of a steel drum band on a beach somewhere and my first boyfriend. I wonder if Ruth even
has any memories that are purely happy like that.)

9/21/06
Trading walks today was absolutely bizarre. I have no concept of how I walk, really,
because I can't see it, but it was obvious that Annie nailed it because of everybody else's
reactions. I like the way I walk, I decided. And I like that I can slip someone else's walk
on like new skin. Also about today's rehearsal I'm loving the exploration of other cultures and performance styles. The Balinese dance
floored me in its intricacy.
But I can't stand Bertoli Brecht and you can't make me. I love realism and Stanislavski
and always will because that is the theatre that can make me cry.
I was sitting backstage at Closer listening to a play I had heard and seen multiple times,
and during one scene I became wracked with silent sobs at its power.
Realist theatre can crush me like nothing I've ever known.
I want to make Ruth real for people. I want someone to cry over the loss of her potential.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

(There are a lot of"I"s on this page. Whoops. Here's a good "we" statement: I think we,
the cast, arc bonding well. It's not hard to picture Annie and Ilana as my family, although
I can't imagine the dysfunctional dynamic quite yet).
A new preoccupation:
Who is Mr. Mayo? The "chocking and banging on the bed?" Was Ruth sexually
abused/did she witness something awful?
-Are seizures brought about because of emotional trauma ever?! don't know if I'm supposed to be asking these questions yet or just concentrating on the
workshop, but I can't wait to dive into the script.

9/25/06
Bummer of an end to a rehearsal.
I don't really get Theatre of Cruelty. At least, I didn't get Marat/Sade. I did find the
layering of the acting - playing a psychopath playing an historical figure - interesting and
admirable. Their preparation must have been incredibly painstaking. That aside, however,
I found the play in general a lot like the electric symphony yesterday - jarring and hard to
follow. I should have focused more but nothing about it, for the most part, made me want
to focus. I think there must be something low or simple about me that I can't appreciate
that art. I found nothing touching about it. Does that matter? It matters to me.
I liked the face-painting as a kind of calming form of expression. Better, though, was the
Seven Deadly Sins approach to Theatre of Cruelty. I connected to that. I did envy,
though, and no one guessed that so it was probably a poor representation.
I feel like a bad actress today. That's discouraging.
I think maybe I've only ever been a good actress because I'm an empathetic person. With
purposely distant forms, all of a sudden I have no ground to stand on.

9/28/06
Amazing night. Little to say because some of it actually took my breath away with
excite1nent.

1 forgot how much I love this.
The improve scene with Annie, in the hospital. .. I felt so real, like I was actually that
person and her words could flow from me so freely. Some of it I could fully identify with
and some of it was scarily new. But it worked. The other girls seemed to feel it too.
Annie gave me all that I needed for that scene.
Improving Gamma Rays from start to finish came surprisingly easy for us. I haven't
spent that much time with my lines. We spent so much time on this workshop that it's
hard to imagine the other girls did either. But I think tonight proved that at the very least,
we have all grasped the heart of the play.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

I had trouble being Ruth at the beginning, but by the time I was convulsing I felt
completely comfortable.
1 wonder if I can live without this feeling.
10/1/06
It was great working with the script for the first time tonight. The workshop process was
so full that I barely visited the script at all. I was a little rusty with the words, for sure, but
that wasn't a problem for long. Working with Annie without being able to see or touch
her in our most dramatic scene helped me really concentrate on the communication. 1 was
listening to her instead of waiting for a cue.
The focus on the flashlight helped tremendously. What does it mean to Ruth? Is she
scared by it or just paralyzed?
She is becoming just like her mother. She is a manipulator. But can you blame her for
pulling every desperate trick she can muster in exchange for just a little normal maternal
attention? What kind of mother leaves her child alone after a seizure?
I liked working the first scene best. It felt very natural and that we were starting to
achieve the family dynamic. Ruth is much more hilarious aloud than she is on paper. I
feel like I'm getting her from bit to bit, scene to scene, but Ruth is not yet a coherent
whole to me.
Is she even a coherent whole to herself, though?
The two scenes today were like night and day for her - and me, too, from everything
down to my voice.
I think Annie was doing some really great things with Beatrice tonight. I felt like she was
mocking me. Not usually a good thing. © It's helping me out a lot because she'll say
something and my - Ruth's - face will fall naturally.
Beatrice deflates, which I think sometimes is just as bad as wounding.

10/2/06
·why are you ashamed of me?
Why are you ashamed of me?
WHY ARE YOU ASHAMED OF ME?
Why are you ashamed of me why are you ashamed of me why are you ashamed of me
why are you ashamed ofmc why are you ashamed ofme
I think if! get this line I get Ruth. Stripped of her various eccentricities she's just this
horribly broken little girl. I connected with that line tonight and I don't know why,
because thank god in my life I have never had to feel that feeling from my parents. How
can you wound your own child so deeply that she is able to ask that question.
If I asked my mother that question she would cry and pull me into her lap and rock me
and cry and cry and ask me how on earth I could feel that she was ashamed of me.
The problem is, Ruth is totally right. Beatrice is ashamed of her to the point that she
barely consider her her own child.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

10/4/06
Ruth's hyperactivity comes easy to me- I think just because her lines are written so
beautifully. When I read them I feel like there's no other choice but the way they come
out. She just talks and talks and talks without thinking or taking in her surroundings and I
actually find it refreshing. I have no natural capacity to talk that quickly or let my
thoughts just come spilling out of me like a freight train. Her concern for her sister is
sweet in this scene. She's completely relatablc here.

NO DATE
Rehearsal tonight was a little rough, but I'm not sure why. I think Caleb and Jenny's
reactions got me down a little. I felt energetic but I was being told we looked tired and
lacking in spirit. Maybe Ruth is harder to find when I'm concentrating too much, because
she's so reactionary. Without the scripts it'll be a lot better because I can really listen to
Ilana more instead of reading.

NO DATE
Short rehearsal. .. I liked doing the little bit of improve that I was there for. It made me a
little less anxious about the improve aspect of the actual performances - at first. But then
I was realizing that Caleb knows and loves this play like we do and was throwing out a
thoughtful and relevant suggestions because he could.
The audience, for the most part, won't know the story at all. I should say, they don't
know our characters or circumstances. It seems to me that what they throw at us has to be
either tiny - which seems pointless unless we use it as a springboard for something big or ridiculous.

10/10/06
I was terrified when Caleb said tonight was not so good. I felt like all my instincts were
completely backwards and that I've been overconfident. But I don't usually get
overconfident, I get terrified and insecure about my ability to make other people really
believe. Ruth has been a pleasant surprise and also kind of a nightmare because this
broken, dysfunctional, twisted, reactionary, scary, scared girl has been coming naturally easily is definitely the wrong word - to me. I was scared that what was feeling natural to
me was actually me being a lazy actor or something. One-on-one with Caleb helped
because he assured me that mostly, I was doing well. He said the word "vibrant" and I
love that word. That may be something in Ruth that I actually envy. People can't help but
look at Ruth, and it's not just because she's weird.
I told Caleb I don't really find her weird anymore, and that's true. The reason she doesn't
seem strange anymore is that, besides the fact that I've been living in her head as much as
I can, I can't blame her for being her. She's a product of her horrendous environment. I
think Tillie is more out of the norm because she's just this kid, this little girl of eleven for

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

god's sake, who manages to save herself from her fate and her family. Ruth is her
mother's daughter, and Tillie is something else entirely.
I started thinking on the walk home about what happens to Rnth after the end of the play.
I think:
-she refuses to go back to school for a week and a half, and when she does, she doesn't
talk to Chris Bums anymore

10/12/06
I liked the improv tonight. .. again. I suppose I should look back in this journal at all the
times I've written that sentence and feel better about improv in the performance. I think I
trust myself now, and I look forward to improv in rehearsal. So I'm not my own problem
anymore, and neither is the idea of improv in general. It is some third variable I don't
trust, and I think it might be the audience. I've never feared the audience so much before.
Showing so much skin in Cabaret will be nothing compared to this. I feel like I'm
painting a bull's eye on my soul and the program is inviting them to take aim.
Half of the tech staff scares the crap out of me. Some of them act like they hate actors. I
don't feel safe in their hands. I feel safe with Caleb and Laird, but there's only so much
they can do.
I might just be a coward. The other girls don't seem as afraid as I am.

NO DATE
What's my "thing?" There's supposed to be one thing I can do to get to Ruth right
away ... Caleb doesn't think any ofus have one yet ... I don't.
I've been thinking of what is powerful enough in my life that is also relevant to Ruth that
can get me to her, immediately, regardless of the situation.
I've never been as erratic as Ruth. But I think I've been connecting with it. Maybe I'm
wrong and I'm not convincing anyone. I think when I've been successful it's because I'm
having fun with it. .. not making fun of Ruth but having fun being Ruth. There are things
in her that I sometimes wish I could be. Call her what you will, but she is vivacious and
unpredictable and bouncy and unflappably electric.
I've started drawing and writing in the margins the way Ruth would. It's fun being her
when it's not so incredibly depressing.

NO DATE
I'm going to try not to let my confidence sink when the notes reflect that I was the one to
sink a scene. Obviously that's part of what's keeping me down.

10/18/06
GOOD RUN! The presence of a new audience helped a lot with the energy. I think. I felt
like Ruth was completely filling the room at some parts. I have never been so excited to
do the next scene, and the next. I am revived completely.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Hana's monologues were beautiful today, completely serene. And Annie was full oflife.
This is maybe the first time the three ofus were fluid (mostly) the whole way through.
In the storm scene Caleb asked me last time what I thought of Tillie's science projects.
I made my decision today - Ruth is confused, dismissive, but above all jealous. She
can't do these things and so doesn't get any attention for it.
I'd like to get more physically comfortable in the nightmare scene, but it probably will
only really come with the couch, so I' 11 cut myself some slack. Jnmping on the couch
scene felt great.

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

APPENDIXE
ACTOR JOURNAL
Paula Aranda, "Janice"
[NOTE: Unfortunately, Paula neglected to mark the dates of her entries. They are
presented in the order in which she wrote them, as they appeared in her journal.]

I was really excited about going to my first rehearsal. I got there and read my part, and
it was OK. I just can't think of a laugh. But I'll work on it. How hard can it be to come up
with a laugh for a geeky character? I guess the whole Caleb doing a laugh and me doing
another one gave me some ideas. It's kind of weird because I've always been given
examples of what to do, and Caleb makes me find it on my own. I guess that when I feel
more like my character it will be better. Stupid laugh.

It was kind of weird at rehearsal today. I'd never done my part in front of the other
actors. I feel kind of intimidated because they all seem to be kind of close because they
did the workshops, and I didn't get.a chance to. I don't feel the connection they all have.
But I guess that's OK because I'm not really supposed to feel like part of the family: I'm
the enemy.
And I still can't get that stupid laugh. And it didn't help that I was so intimidated,
especially by Annie. I really wish I had beeu able to go the workshops.

I thought that being off-book would help me feel more like Janice, but no. I was too
focused on trying to remember the lines to actually act. And on top of that I completely
messed them np. I have the fewest amount oflines (not counting Sydney) and I can't
even learn them. This is ridiculous.
And on top of that I can't even get that stupid laugh right. I'm really not feeling the
laugh. I gness that part of the problem is that I don't even get why I would laugh. It's
hard because I don't have a little brother so I don't see why it's funny. I guess I just have
to keep trying.

Well Caleb helped me find a laugh that works: my really annoying laugh. Too bad I
can't make myself laugh like that while I'm doing my monologue. I can only laugh like
that when I really find something absolutely hilarious, and this is just more of ridiculous,
nervous laughter.
What really did help was Caleb suggesting starting the laugh earlier so that I'm
laughing while I speak. I guess I'm feeling it more that way. This is getting much better I
think. I hope it looks that way too.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

It sucks because everyone else seems to be doing much better. I think it's harder for me
because I only have a one minute scene to develop my character.
But you know, I think I'm doing much better in relating with the other actors. I don't'
feel intimidated anymore. This should be good.
Working on my monologue with Jenny was very different. Annie was sitting there and I
wasn't feeling embarrassed, which is awesome. But Jenny did help, a lot because she
realized that I didn't really get why I had to laugh during the part about my brother. But
she said it's because I think he is so ridiculous it makes me laugh. I guess that makes
more sense and it's kind of starting to work. I just have to find a laugh that will actually
fit me. I love how Jenny is so excited about everything. She was making me feel really
good about my artistic choices. I don't know, I guess it's getting better.

I !mow that the improve today was in no way directed to help me, but it really did
actually. A typical day at school shows me as a sort of outcast with no real friends. I felt
like I was a little geek who is trying really hard to fit in with the cool girls and doesn't
want to try to make friends with someone like Tillie because she is obviously teacher's
pet. The whole lunch scene where Tillie begins going to the table, I was next and
purposely sat at the opposite end so that I won't be seen as being friendly with such a
person, but then when everyone else came I kind of wanted to be included in the fun.

The hot seat activity was really good for me. I know I should have, but I've never really
though about my character outside of the experiment. Some of the stuff! said I got from
my real life experience, like my mom being a teacher. And then, well I was acting kind of
childish and not interested in boys because that's how I used to be. I was a very late
bloomer. But that obviously didn't work because I start giggling about dating in school
during the science fair. I had thought of it as a nervous laugh, but I think it's better this
way.

Oct. 30
The run last night was pretty good. I know that for the other actors it was worse than
usual, but for me it was great. For the first time, I was actually feeling like Janice. I think
it's kind of because I was in front ofan audience with a light on me, which iskind oflike
it would be in a science fair. I felt like I was actually trying to prove how great my
experiment is. Also, I didn't think that I would get any suggestions from the audience, but
I did, and they worked. Even the picking my nose was good. I felt like such a geek, it was
amazmg.

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

APPENDIXF
Introductory Speech
Sloan:
Good evening. I'm Sloan, the producer of tonight's performance of The Effect of Gamma
Rays on Man-in-the-Moon Marigolds. This will be an unusual production.

We want to examine how audience participation can alter a performance. I'd like to
encourage you all to participate in this production by making suggestions that subtly or
radically alter the trajectory of the play. We hope you have a lot of fun with it, though
you are equally as entitled to just sit back and enjoy the show as is.
Please take a moment to turn off all cell phones and electronic devices - although we
want your suggestions, and because we want them, we can't have extraneous noises.
To ensure that the show runs smoothly, there are some guidelines to structure your
participation. Our director, Caleb Green, will explain these rules.
Caleb:
Good evening, everyone. I'd like to draw your attention to the pink insert in your
program; there you will find the rules governing our experiment. According to these
rules, you, the audience will be encouraged to do certain things but will also be prevented
from doing others. The first and most important thing for you to understand is that the
actors and technicians will choose whether or not to enact your suggestions. Second, the
actors will not halt the perfmmance to listen to your suggestions. It is pivotal that you
speak loudly and clearly so as to be heard. Now onto the specific rules. Please follow
along as I review them one by one.

I) Yon cannot prevent the performers from performing.
2) Yon cannot stop the play from moving forward (i.e. cannot ask/tell the actors to
repeat a section).
3) You may make as many different suggestions as you would like. However, you
may only make the same suggestion (whether enacted or not) a maximum oftluee
times.

4) You may suggest changing plot, character, acting, blocking, or direction.
5) You may suggest changing technical aspects (sound, lights, set, costumes, props).
6) You must designate to whom the suggestion is directed (if everyone onstage, then
"Everyone"). Tech, on the other hand, does not need to be designated; simply
shout out the suggestion.
7) Your suggestions may be constructive or deconstructive in nature, but must
pertain to the artistic performance.
8) Have fun 1 It's always better to suggest something. The actors and technicians may
or may not choose to enact your idea, but there's nothing to lose in suggesting it.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Again, this experiment will make for an exciting evening of theatre, hopefully unlike
anything you've experienced before! I would like to point out that you yourselves are
now participants in this production. Consequently, your behavior should reflect this
position. Your suggestions do not have to be positive or constructive - they can be
deconstructive or critical, but they should always pertain to the performance of the play.
Excessively adverse or aggressive behavior will result in your ejection from the theatre.
This is a serious experiment - we ask for your respect and cooperation. You may test the
actors' boundaries, but do not taunt them or simply try to mess them up.
I will be seated at the back of the theatre with a microphone in hand. If necessary, I might
intervene and mediate as director. The performance should be an exciting and unusual
dialogue between all of us.
Thank you again for coming. Enjoy the show.

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

APPENDIXG
AUDIENCE TRANSCRIPT
Nov. 2, 2006 Thursday 8 pm
KEY:
[response] : spectator's response
m : male spectator
f : female spectator
[=I : no response, or negative response from the audience to the comment
]±] : positive response from audience to comment, typically laughter
* : suggestion was taken up by performer or tech
- : no reaction, or negative reaction, to the enacted suggestion by the audience
+ : positive reaction, typically laughter, to the enacted suggestion by the audience
# : spectator suggested something moments before it was scheduled to happen
EXAMPLE:
[Act. + m]*- : A male spectator shouted out, "Act." The audience responded to this
suggestion with laughter. Subsequently, an actor accepted the suggestion and enacted
it. This time, however, the audience did not react, or reacted negatively, to the actor's
enactment.

I.i
[Turn the lights on. + fJ
TILLIE'S VOICE: He told me to look at my hand, for a part of it came from a star that
exploded too long ago to imagine. This part of me was formed from a tongue of fire
that screamed through the heavens until there was our sun. And this part of me - this
tiny part of me - was on the sun when it itself exploded and whirled in a great stonn
until the planets came to be. And this small part of me was then a whisper of the
earth. When there was life, perhaps this part of me got lost in a fern that was crushed
and covered until it was coal. And then it was a diamond millions of years later - it
must have been a diamond as beautiful as the star from which it had first come. Or
perhaps this part of me became lost in a terrible beast, or became part of a huge bird
that flew above the primeval swamps. And he said this thing was so small - this part
of me was so small it couldn't be seen - but it was there from the beginning of the
world. And he called this bit of me an atom. And when he wrote the word, I fell in
love with it. Atom. Atom. What a beautiful word.
I.ii
BEATRICE: Will you get that please? No help! Never any help! Hello? Yes it is. Who
is this? .. .I hope there hasn't been any trouble at school. .. Oh, she's always been like
that. She hardly says a word around here, either. I always say some people were born
to speak and others born to listen ... You know I've been meaning to call you to thank

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

you for that lovely rabbit you gave Matilda. She and I just adore it and it's gotten so
big ... Wcll, it certainly was thoughtful. Mr. Goodman, I don't mean to change the
subject but aren't you that delightful young man Tillie said hello to a couple of
months back at the A & P? You were by the lobster tank and I was near the frozen
foods? That delightful and handsome young man? ... Why, I would very much indeed
use the expression handsome. Yes, and ... Well, I encourage her at every opportunity
at home. Did she say I didn't? Both my daughters have their own desks and I put 75watt bulbs right near them ... Yes ... Yes ... l think those tests arc very much overrated,
anyway, Mr. Goodman ... Well, believe me she's nothing like that around this
house ... Now I don't want you to think I don't appreciate what you're trying to do,
Mr. Goodman, but I'm afraid it's simply useless. I've tried just everything, but she
isn't a pretty girl- I mean, let's be frank about it - she's going to have her problems.
Are you married, Mr. Goodman? Oh, that's too bad. I don't know what's the matter
with women today letting a handsome young man like you get away ... Well, some
days she just doesn't feel like going to school. You just said how bright she is, and
I'm really afraid to put too much of a strain on her after what happened to her sister.
You !mow, too much strain is the worst thing in this modern world, Mr. Goodman,
and I can't afford to have another convulsive on my hands, now can I? [IN - fl But
don't you worry about Matilda. There will be some place for her in this world. And,
like I said, some were born to speak and others just to listen ... and do call again, Mr.
Goodman. It's been a true pleasure speaking with you. Goodbye.
BEATRICE: Matilda, that wasn't very nice of you to tell them I was forcibly detaining
you from school. Why, the way that Mr. Goodman spoke, he must think I'm running
a concentration camp. Do you have any idea how embarrassing it is to be accused of
rum1ing a concentration camp for your own children? Well, it isn't embarrassing at
all. That school of yours is forty years behind the times anyway, and believe me you
learn more around here than that ugly Mr. Goodman can teach you' You !mow, I
really feel sorry for him. I never saw a man with a more effeminate face in my life.
When I saw you talking to him by the lobster tank I said to myself, "Good Lord, for a
science teacher my poor girl has got herself a Hebrew hermaphrodite." Of course,
he's not as bad as Miss Hanley. [Give Tillie the beer. + fl The idea of letting her
teach girl's gym is staggering. And you have to place me in the embarrassing position
of giving them a reason to call me at eight-thirty in the morning, no less.
TILLIE: I didn't say anything.
BEATRICE: What do you tell them when they want to know why you stay home once
in a while?
TILLIE: I tell them I'm sick.
BEATRICE: Oh, you're sick all right, the exact nature of the illness not fully realized,
but you' re sick all right. Any daughter that would turn her mother in as administrator
of a concentration camp has got be suffering from something very peculiar.
TILLIE: Can I go in today, Mother?
BEATRICE: You'll go in, all right.
TILLIE: Mr. Goodman said he was going to do an experiment BEATRICE: Why, he looks like the kind that would do his experimenting after
sundown.
TILLIE: On radioactivity -

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE: On radioactivity? That's all that high school needs!
TILLIE: He's going to bring in the cloud chamberBEATRICE: Why, what an outstanding event. If you had warned me yesterday I
would've gotten all dressed to kill and gone with you today. I love seeing cloud
chambers being brought in.
TILLIE: You can actually see BEATRICE: You're giving me a headache.
TILLIE: Please?
BEATRICE: No, my dear, the fortress of knowledge is not going to be blessed with your
presence today. 1 have a good number of exciting duties for you to talce care of, not
the least of which is rabbit droppings.
TILLIE: Oh, Mother, please ... I'll do it after school.
BEATRICE: If we wait a minute longer this house is going to ferment. I found rabbit
droppings in my bedroom even.
TILLIE: I could do it after Mr. Goodman's class. I'll say I'm ill and ask for a sick pass.
BEATRICE: Do you want me to chloroform that thing right this minute?
TILLIE: No!
BEATRICE: Then shut up.
[IN -fj
RUTH: Do you have Devil's Kiss down there?
BEATRICE: It's in the bathroom cabinet.
RUTH: There's so much junk in here it's driving me crazy.
BEA TRICE: Maybe it's in my purse ... If you don't hurry up you'll be late for school.
RUTH: Well, I couldn't very well go in without Devil's Kiss, now could I?
BEATRICE: Doesn't anyone go to school these days without that all over their lips?
RUTH: Nobody I know, except Tillie, that is. And if she had a little lipstick on I'll bet
they wouldn't have laughed at her so much yesterday.
BEATRICE: Why were they laughing?
RUTH: The assembly. Didn't she tell you about the assembly?
BEATRICE: Ruth, you didn't tell me she was in an assembly.
RUTH: Well, I just thought ofit right now. How could I tell you anything until I think of
it - did you ever stop to consider that? Some crummy science assembly.
BEA TRI CE: What is she talking about?
RUTH: I thought she'd tell the whole world. Imagine, right in front of the assembly, with
everybody laughing at her.
BEATRICE: Will you be quiet, Ruth? Why were they laughing at you?
TILLIE: 1 don't know.
RUTH: You don't know? My heavens, she was a sight. She had that old jumper on - the
faded one with that low collar - and a raggy slip that showed all over and her hair
looked like she was struck by lightning.
BEATRICE: You're exaggerating ...
RUTH: She was cranking this model of something TILLIE: The atom.
RUTH: This model of the atom ... you know, it had this crank and a long tower so that
when you turned it, these little colored balls went spinning around like crazy. And
there was Tillie, cranking away, looking weird as a coot ... that old jumper with the

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

raggy slip and the lightning hair. .. cranking away while some boy with glasses was
reading this stupid speech ... and everybody burst into laughter until the teachers
yelled at them. And all day long, the kids kept coming up to me saying, "Is that really
your sister? How can you bear it?" And you know, Chris Burns says to me - "She
looks like the one that went to the looney doctors." I could have kissed him there and
then.
BEATRICE: Matilda, if you can't get yourself dressed properly before going to school,
you're never going to go again. I don't like the idea of everybody laughing at you,
becanse when they laugh at you they're laughing at me. And I don't want you
cranking any more ... atoms.
RUTH: You're almost out of Devil's Kiss.
BEATRICE: If you didn't put so much on it would last longer.
RUTH: Who was that calling?
BEATRICE: Matilda turned me in to the Gestapo.
RUTH: Can I earn a cigarette this morning?
BEATRICE: Why not?
RUTH: Was it Mr. Goodman?
BEATRICE: Who?
RUTH: The call this morning. Was it Mr. Goodman?
BEATRICE: Yes.
RUTH: I figured it would be.
BEATRICE: A little higher, [Wack her with it. - fl*- please.
RUTH: There?
BEATRICE: Yes, there ... (Brush her hair with it. - fl Why did you figure it would be
Mr. Goodman?
RUTH: Well, he called me out of sewing class yesterday - I remember because my
blouse wasn't all buttoned - and he wanted to know why Tillie's out of school so
much.
BEATRICE: Lower. A little lower. .. And what did you tell him?
RUTH: I wish yon' d go back to Koo ls. I liked Kools better.
TILLIE: What did you tell him?
RUTH: I told him you were ill, and he wanted to !mow what kind, so I told him you had
leprosy.
TILLIE: You didn't!
RUTH: You should have seen his face. He was so cute. And I told him you had
ringworm and gangrene.
BEATRICE: What did he say?
RUTH: And I told him you had what Mother's last patient had ... whatchamacallit?
BEATRICE: Psoriasis?
RUTH: Yeah. Something like that.
TILLIE: Tell me you didn't, Ruth!
RUTH: OK. I didn't ... But I really did.
BEA TRICE: He knew you were joking.
RUTH: And then I told him to go look np the history and then he'd find out. Whenever
they go look up the history then they don't bother me anymore ·cause they think I'm
crazy.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE: RuthRUTH: And I told him the disease you had was fatal and that there wasn't much hope for
you.
BEATRICE: What kind of history is it?
RUTH: Just a little folder with the story of our lives in it, that's all.
BEATRICE: How did you ever see it?
RUTH: I read the whole thing last term when Miss Hanley dragged me into the record
room because I didn't want to climb the ropes in gym and I told her my skull was
growmg.
BEA TRICE: A little lower, please.
RUTH: Lower! Higher! I wish you'd make up your mind. If you'd switch back to Kools
it might be worth it, but ugh! these are awful. You know, I really did think my skull
was growing. Either that or a tumor. So she dragged me out of gym class, and she
thought I couldn't read upside down while she was sitting opposite me with the
history. But I could.
BEATRICE: What does it say?
RUTH: Oh, it says you're divorced and that I went crazy ... and my father took a heart
attack at Star Lake ... and now you're a widow BEATRICE: That's it! Hold it right there! Aaah!
RUTH: And it says that I exaggerate and tell stories and that I'm afraid of death and
have nightmares ... and all that stuff.
BEATRICE: And what else does it say?
RUTH: I can't remember everything you know. Remember this, remember that...
remember this, that. ..

I.iii
TILLIE'S VOICE: Today I saw it. Behind the glass a white cloud began to form. He
placed a small piece of metal in the center of the chamber and we waited until I saw
the first one - a trace of smoke that came from nowhere and then disappeared. And
then another. .. and another, until I knew it was corning from the metal. They looked
like water-sprays from a park fountain, and they went on and on for as long as I
watched. And he told me the fountain of smoke would come forth for a long time, and
if1 had wanted to, I could have stayed there all my life and it would never have ended
- that fountain, so close I could have touched it. In front of my eyes, one part of the
world was becoming another. Atoms exploding, flinging off tiny bnllets that caused
the fountain, atom after atom breaking down into something new. And no one could
stop the fountain. It would go on for millions of years - on and on, this fountain from
eternity.
I.iv
BEATRICE: I thought we had everything, but leave it to you to think of the one thing
we're rnissing ... Twenty-two acres in Prince's Bay. Small pond. $6,000 ... That's
cheap. I'd take a look at it if I had any money ... What kind of seeds are they?
TILLIE: Marigolds. They've been exposed to cobalt-60.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE: If there's one thing I've always wanted, it's been a living room planted
with marigolds that have been exposed to cobalt-60. While you're at it, why don't
you throw in a tomato patch in the bathroom?
TILLIE: Just let me keep them here for a week or so until they get started and then I'll
transplant them to the backyard.
BEATRICE: Four-family house. Six and a half and six and a half over five and five.
Eight garages. I could really do something with that. A nursing home ... Don't think
I'm not kicking myself that I didn't finish that real estate course. I should have
finished beauty school, too ... God, what I could do with eight garages ... You know,
I'm thinking of getting rid of that and making this place into something.
TILLIE: Yes.
BEATRICE: I've been thinking about a tea shop. Have you noticed there aren't many of
them around anymore?
TILLIE: Yes.
BEATRICE: And this is just the type of neighborhood where a good tea shop could
make a go of it. We'd have a good cheesecake. You've got to have a good
cheesecake ... Eight times ten - well, eight times eight, if they're falling down- that's
sixty-four dollars a month from the garages alone ... I swear money makes money.
BEATRICE: What is cobalt-60?
TILLIE: It's something that causes ... changes in seeds. Oh, Mother - he set the cloud
chamber up just for me and he told me about radioactivity and half~life and he got the
seeds for me.
BEATRICE: What does half-life mean?
TILLIE: The half-life of Polonium-210 is one hundred and forty days. The half-life of
Radium-226 is one thousand five hundred and ninety years. The half-life ofUranium238 is four and one-half billion years.
BEATRICE: Do you know you're giving me a headache? LOOK WHO'S THERE! IT'S
NANNY! NANNY CAME ALL THE WAY OUT HERE BY HERSELF! I'm going
to need a cigarette for this. NANNY! YOU COME SIT DOWN AND WE'LL BE
RIGHT WITH HER! [Stop smoking. - mj You know, sometimes I've got to laugh.
I've got this on my hands and all you're worried about is planting marigolds. I'VE
GOT HOTSY WATER.FOR YOU, NANNY. WOULD YOU LIKE SOME HOTSY
WATER AND HONEY? I've never seen it to fail. Every time I decide to have a cup
of coffee I see that face at the curtains. I wonder what she'd do .. .ifI just poured this
right over her head. (Do it. - f(*+ I'll be she wouldn't even notice it. (Fall of the
chair. - f] NANNY'S GOING TO GET JUST WHAT SHE NEEDS! [Spill it. - fl
You know if someone told me when I was young that I'd end up feeding honey to a
zombie, I'd tell them they were crazy. SOMETHING WRONG, NANNY? OH, DID I
FORGET NANNY'S SPOON? MERCY! MERCY! I FORGOT NANNY'S SPOON!
I'll give you a spoon, Nanny, I'll give you a spoon. (Nanny, knock the table over. !!!l [Throw the cup at her. - f] Matilda 1 Watch me give Nanny her spoon. (Don't
watch. - t)*+ A SPOON FOR NANNY! Fifty dollars a week. Fifty dollars. I look at
you, Nanny, and I wonder if it's worth it. I think I'd be better off driving a cab.
TAKE HONEY, NANNY. HONEY WITH HOTSY WATER! You should have seen
her daughter bring her here last week .. .! could have used you that day ... She came in
pretending she was Miss Career Woman of the Year. She said she was in real estate

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

and such a busy little woman, such a busy little woman - she just couldn't give all the
love and care and affection her little momsy needed anymore ... Nanny's quite a little
cross to bear, now aren't you, Nanny dear? [Help Nanny. - fl But you're a little
better than Mr. Mayo was - with the tumor on his brain - or Miss Marion Minto with
her cancer, or Mr. Brougham ... [Tillie, open that for Nanny. - fl what was his first
name?
TILLIE: Alexander.
BEATRICE: Mr. Alexander Brougham with the worms in his legs. WHY, NANNY'S
QUITE SOME LITTLE GIRL, AREN'T YOU, NANNY? A GIRL DRINKING HER
HOTSY AND HONEY! ... Cobalt-60. Ha! You take me for a fool, don't you?
TILLIE: No, Mother.
BEATRICE: Science, science, science! Don't they teach our misfits anything anymore?
Anything decent and meaningful and sensitive? Do you know what I'd be now if it
wasn't for this mud pool I got sucked into? I'd probably be a dancer. [Dance. - ml
[Show us your boobs. + fl Miss Betty Frank, The Best Dancer of the Class of 19, ..
[Spotlight. - fj * [(internal) Yes. - f That's it. - fl something. One minute I'm the
best dancer in school [IN - fl - smart as a whip - [Dance for us. + fl the head of the
whole crowd! [Background music. + fl And the next minute ... One mistake. That's
how it starts. Marry the wrong man and before you know it he's got you tied down
with two stones around your neck for the rest of your life. When I was in that lousy
high school I was one of the most respected kids you ever saw. I used to wonder why
people always said, "Why, just yesterday ... why, just yesterday ... why, just
yesterday ... " Before I knew what happened I lost my dancing legs and got varicose
legs. Beautiful varicose legs. Do you know, everything I ever thought I'd be has
exploded! NANNY, YOU HURRY UP WITH THAT HONEY! [Nanny, spill it. - fl
Exploded! You know, I almost forgot about everything I was supposed to be ...
[Spotlight on Nanny.+ ml [Speak, Nanny. - fl NANNY'S ALMOST FINISHED.
ISN'T THAT WONDERFUL? She's almost finished, all right. NANNY'S
DAUGHTER IS COMING TO SEE YOU SOON. WILL THAT MAKE NANNY
HAPPY? [IN - fl The day Miss Career Woman of the Year comes to visit again I
think I'll drop dead. [Drop dead.+ ml Nobody's too busy for anything they want to
do, [Give Nanny the beer. + fl don't you tell me. What kind of idiot do people take
me for? NANNY, YOU'RE SPILLING YOUR HOTSY! JESUS CHRIST! [Get the
beer. + fl You know, I ought to kick you right out and open that tea shop tomorrow.
[Do it. - fl Oh, it's coming. I can feel it. And the first thing I'll do is get rid of that
rabbit.
TILLIE: Yes, Mother.
BEATRICE: You think I'm kidding?
TILLIE: No, I don't.
BEATRICE: You bet I'm not 1 I was going to do this a month ago. !Kill the rabbit. - fl
[Nanny, drink the beer. + fl Here it is. Here's a new word for you.
Trichloro ... methane. Do you know what that is, Matilda? Well, it's chloroform' I'm
saving it for that Angora manure machine of yours. Speaking of manure machines, IS
NANNY READY TO GO MAKE DUTY? NANNY IS ALWAYS READY FOR
DUTY, [Fall over. - fl AREN'T YOU NANNY? BECAUSE NANNY'S A
GOODY-GOODY GIRL AND GOODY-GOODY GIRLS ALWAYS GET GOODY-

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

GOODY THINGS. GOD LOOKS OUT FOR GOODY-GOODY GIRLS AND
GIVES THEM HOTSY AND HONEY - RIGHT, NANNY?
BEATRICE: Half-life! If you want to know what a half-life is, just ask me. You're
looking at the original half-life! I got stuck with one daughter with half a mind;
another one who's half a test tube; half a husband - a house half full of rabbit crap and half a corpse! That's what I call a half-life, Matilda! Me and eobalt-60! Two of
the biggest half-fifes you ever saw!

l.v
BEATRICE: Hello - Mr. Goodman, please ... How would I know if he's got a
elass? ... Hello, Mr. Goodman? Are you Mr. Goodman? ... Oh, I beg your pardon, Miss
Torgersen ... Yes, I'll wait ... Couldn't you find him, Miss Torgersen? ... Oh! Excuse
me, Mr. Goodman. How are you? .. .I'll bet you'll never guess who this is - it's Mrs.
Hunsdorfer - remember the frozen foods? You know, Ruth told me she's your new
secretary and I certainly think that's a delight. You were paying so much attention to
Matilda that I'll bet Ruth just got jealous. She does things like that, you know. I hope
she works hard for you, although I can't imagine what kind of work Ruth could be
doing in that great big science office. She's a terrible snoop ... Your attendance? Isn't
that charming. And the cut cards! Imagine. You trust her with ... why, I didn't know
she could type at all .. .imagine. Well .. .I'll ... Of course, too much work isn't good for
· anyone, either. No wonder she's failing everything. I mean, I never knew a girl who
failed everything regardless of what they were suffering from .. .I suppose I should say
recovering from ... Well, it's about the seeds you gave Matilda ... Well, she's had them
in the house for a week now and they're starting to grow. Now, she told me they had
been subjected to radioactivity, and I hear such terrible things about radioactivity that
I automatically associate radioactivity with sterility, and it positively horrifies me to
have those seeds right here in my living room. Couldn't she just grow plain marigolds
like everyone else? Oh ... It does sound like an interesting project, but... No, I must
admit that at this very moment I don't know what a mutation is ... Mr. Goodman ...
Mr. Goodman! I don't want you to think I'm not interested, but please spare me
definitions over the phone. I'll go the library next week and pick me out some little
book on science and then I'll know all about mutations ... No, you didn't insult me,
but I just want you to know that I'm not stiipid ... I just thought prevention was better
than a tragedy, Mr. Goodman. I mean, Matilda has enough problems to worry about
without sterility ... [Ask him on a date. + fl*+ Well, I was just concerned, but
you've put my poor mother's heart at ease. You !mow, really, our schools need more
exciting young men like you, I really mean that. Really. Oh, I do. Goodbye, Mr.
Goodman.
I.vi
TILLIE: Mother! She's going to have one!
BEATRICE: Stop it 1 Stop it, Ruth!
TILLIE: She's going!
BEATRICE: Ruth! Stop itt
TILLIE: She's going to go!

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE: Shut up and get back in your room! You're not going to let yourself go, do
you hear me, Ruth? You're not going to go!
RUTH: He's after me!
BEATRICE: You were dreaming, do you hear me? Nobody's after you' Nobody!
TILLIE: I saw her eyes start to go baek BEATRICE: Get back in your room! There, now, nobody's after you. Nice and easy.
[Lightning. - m] Breathe deeply ... Did the big bad man come after my little girl?
[Spotlight and a romantic song. + m]*- [IN - fJ That big bad bogey man 7 Now
that wasn't so bad, was it 7
RUTH: It was the dream, with Mr. Mayo again.
BEATRICE: Oh. Well, we'll just get you a little hot milk and (Power's out. - fl#
Why, the electricity's gone off. Do you remember what happened to those candles?
RUTH: What candles?
BEATRICE: The little white ones from my birthday cake last year.
I{cut herself off) - fl
RUTH: Tillie melted them down for school a long time ago.
BEATRICE: She had no right to do that.
[Tillie's got the flashlight. - fl
RUTH: She asked you. [Tillie come save them. - f)*+ She used them to attach a paper
straw to a milk bottle with a balloon over it, [Check the rabbit. - fl and it was
supposed to tell if it was going to rain.
BEATRICE: There! It works. I don't want her wasting anything of mine unless she's
positive I won't need it. You always need candles. (Nanny, come on stage. + fl
[(internal discussion and jokes)] [Tillie, go hug her. - m] [Tillie, don't take no
for an answer. - fl [Tillie, snuggle with your sister. - fl [Tillie, go to Nauny. +
f) Why, Ruth - your skin just turned ice cold! This will warm you up ... What's the
matter?
RUTH: The flashlightBEATRICE: What's wrong with it?
RUTH: It's the same one I used to check on Mr. Mayo with.
BEATRICE: So it is. We don't need it.
RUTH: No, let me keep it. (Tell us about Mr. Mayo. - fl Do you want to know how
they·have it in the history?
BEATRICE: No, I don't.
RUTH: Well, they say I came out of my room ... And I started down the stairs, step by
step ... and I heard the choking and banging on the bed, and ...
BEATRICE: I'm going back to bed.
RUTH: No 1
BEATRICE: Well, talk about something nice, then.
RUTH: Oh, Mama, tell me about the wagon.
BEATRICE: You change so fast I can't keep up with you.
RUTH: Mama,please ... the story about the wagon.
BEATRICE: I don't !mow anything about telling stories. Get those great big smart
teachers of yours to do that sort of stuff.
RUTH: Tell me about the horses again, and how you stole the wagon.
BEATRICE: Don't get me started on that.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

RUTH: Mama,please ...
BEA TRICE: Do you want a cigarette?
RUTH: Leave out the part where they shoot the horses, though.
BEATRICE: Honey, you know the whole story RUTH: "Apples! Pears' Cu .. .cumbers 1"
BEATRICE: No. It's "Apples' Pears! Cucum . .. bers!"
BEATRICE AND RUTH: "Apples' Pears! Cucwn . .. bers 1"
RUTH: How did you get the wagon out without him seeing you?
BEATRICE: That was easy. Every time he got home for the day he'd make us both
some sandwiches - my mama had been dead for years - and he'd take a nap on the
old sofa that used to be ... there' And while he was sleeping I got the horses hitched up
and went riding around the block waving to everyone.
RUTH: Oh, Mama, you didn't'
BEATRICE: Of course I did. I had more nerve than a bear when I was a kid. Let me tell
you it takes nerve to sit up on that wagon every day yelling "Apples!. .. Pears!
Cucum .. .bers!''
RUTH: Did he find out you took the wagon?
BEATRICE: Did he find out? He came running down the street after me and started
spanking me right on top of the wagon - not hard - but it was so embarrassing - and I
had one of those penny marshmallow ships in the back pocket of my overalls, [Lights
come backon. - fl*- and it got all squished. And you better believe I never did it
again ... .(Rain stops. - fl*- You would have loved him, Ruth, and gone out with him
on the wagon ... all over Stapleton yelling as loud as you wanted.
RUTH: "Apples! Pears! Cu .. .cumbers!"
BEATRICE: No!
RUTH: "Cucum .. .bers!"
BEATRICE: My father made up for all the other men in this whole world, Ruth. If only
you two could have met. He'd only be about seventy now, do you realize that? And
I'll bet he'd still be selling vegetables armmd town. All that fun - and then I don't
think I ever knew what really hit me.
RUTH: Don't tell about BEATRICE: Don't worry about the horses.
RUTH: What hit you?
BEA TRICE: Well it was just me and Papa ... and your father hanging arotmd. And then
Papa got sick ... and I drove with him up to the sanatorium. And then I came home
and there were the horses RUTH: Mother!
BEATRICE: And I had the horses ... taken care of. And then Papa got terribly sick and
he begged me to marry so that he'd be sure I'd be taken care of. Ifhe knew how I was
taken care of he'd tum over in his grave. And nightmares! Do you want to know the
nightmare I used to have? 1 never had nightmares over the fights with your father, or
the divorce, or this thrombosis - he deserved it - I never had nightmares over any of
that. Let me tell you about my nightmare that used to come back and back: Well, I'm
on Papa's wagon, but it's newer and shinier, and it's being pulled by beautiful white
horses, not dirty workhorses - these are like circus horses with long manes and tinsel
- and the wagon is blue, shiny blue. And it's full - filled with yellow apples and

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

grapes and green squash. You're going to laugh when you hear this. I'm wearing a
lovely gown with jewels all over it, and my hair is piled up on top of my head with a
long feather in it, and the bells are ringing. Huge bells swinging on a gold braid
strung across the back of the wagon, and they're going DONG, DONG ... DONG,
DONG. And I'm yelling "APPLES! PEARS! CUCUM ... BERS!"
RUTH: That doesn't sound like a nightmare to me.
BEATRICE: And then I tum down our street and all the noise stops. This long street,
with all the doors of the houses shut and everything crowded next to each other, and
there's not a soul around. And then I start getting afraid that the vegetables are going
to spoil. .. and that nobody's going to buy anything, and I feel as though I shouldn't be
on the wagon, and I keep trying to call out. But there isn't a sound. Not a single
sound. Then I tum my head and look at the honse across the street. I see an upstairs
window, and a pair of hands pnll the curtains slowly apart. I see the face of my father
and my heart stands still ... Ruth ... take the light out of my eyes.
[Put the light back in her eyes.+ mj [Unfreeze. - fJ
RUTH: ls Nanny going to die here?
BEATRICE: No.
RUTH: How can you be sure?
BEATRICE: I can tell.
RUTH: Are you crying?
BEATRICE: What's left for me, Ruth?
RUTH: What, Marna?
BEATRICE: What's left for me?
I.vii
[Change the music. - fJ JNo! + mJ [Spotlight on Nanny. - fJ [Light rock. + fJ
[Begin scene. + mj
[Fast forward. + mj
[You're not taking any of our
suggestions. - fJ I(internal, in response to previous) Ooh ... - fJ [Take a shot. +
fJ [The couch is smoking. - fJ
TILLIE: What are you doing?
BEATRICE: A little housecleaning, and you're going to help. You can start by getting
rid of that rabbit or I'll suffocate the bastard. You don't think I will, do you? You
wait and see. Where's Ruth? She's probably running around the schoolyard in her
brassiere.
TILLIE: Mother, they want me to do something at school.
BEATRICE: NANNYI DID YOU HEAR THAT? THEY WANT HER TO DO
SOMETHING AT SCHOOL! ISN'T THAT MOMENTOUS, NANNY? Well I want
you to do something around here. Like get rid of that bunny. I'm being generous! I'll
let you give it away. Far away. Give it to Mr. Goodman. I'd chloroform the thing
myself, but that crazy sister of yours would throw convulsions for fifty years ... and I
hate a house that vibrates. And get rid of those sterile marigolds. They stink! HI,
NANNY - HOW ARE YOU, HONEY? HOW WOULD YOU LIKE TO GO ON A
LONG TRIP? You see, everybody, I spent today taking stock of my life and I've
come up with zero. I added up all the separate departments and the total reads zero ...
zero zero zero zero zero [Stop. + fJ zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero
zero zero zero ... And do you !mow how you pronounce that, with all your

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

grammatical schoolin' [IN - f] and foolin'? You pronounce it o,o,o,o,O,O,O,O,O,0, 1
(IN - ml o,o,o,o,O,O,O,O,O,O,O,O! [Holy shit. - ml (Did it break? - m[ [Yeah.
- fl Right, Nanny? RIGHT, NANNY? (IN - fl So, by the end of the week, you get
rid of that cottontail compost heap and we'll get you a job down at the five-and-tencent store. And if you don't do so well with the public, we'll fix you up with some
kind of machine. Wouldn't that be nice?
RUTH: Can you believe it" (IN - fl I didn't, until Chris Burns came np and told me
about it in Geography, and then Mr. Goodman told me himself during the eighth
period in the office when I was eavesdropping. Aren't you so happy you could bust?
Tillie 9 I'm so proud I can't believe it, Marna. Everybody was talking about it and
nobody ... well, it was the first time they all came up screaming about her and I said,
"Yes, she's my sister!" I said it, "She's my sister! My sister! My sister!" Give me a
cigarette.
BEATRICE: Get your hands off my personal property.
RUTH: I'll scratch your back later.
BEATRICE: I don't want you to touch me!
RUTH: Did he call yet? My God, I can't believe it, I just can't!
BEATRICE: Did who call yet?
RUTH: I'm not supposed to tell you, as Mr. Goodman's private secretary, but you're
going to get a call from school.
BEATRICE: What is she talking about?
TILLIE: I was in the Science Fair at school.
RUTH: Didn't she tell you yet? Oh, Tillie, how could you? She's fantastic, Marna! She's
a finalist in the Science Fair. There were only five of them out of hundreds and
hundreds. She won with all those plants over there. They're freaks! Isn't that a
scream? Dr. Berg picked her himself. The principal! And I heard Mr. Goodman say
she was going to be another Madam Pasteur [Fall. - rn l and he never saw a girl do
anything like that before and ... so I told everybody, "Yes, she's my sister!" Tillie,
"You're my sister!" I said. And Mr. Goodman called the Advance and they're corning
to take your picture. Oh, Marna, isn't it crazy? And nobody laughed at her, Mama.
She beat out practically everybody and nobody laughed at her. "She's my sister," I
said. "She's my sister'" That must be him! Marna, answer it - I'm afraid. (Wake up,
Nanny. - fl Answer it before he hangs up! (Have Nannv answer it.+ fl Marna! He's
gonna hang up! [Pick it up. -fl Hello? ... Yes ... It's hirn! .. .Just a minute, please ... He
wants to talk to you.
BEATRICE: Who?
RUTH: The principa/ 1
BEATRICE: Hang up.
RUTH: I told him you were here! Marna!
BEATRICE: (Be nice on the phone. - fl Yes? .. .! know who you are, Dr. Berg .. .I
see ... Couldn't you get someone else? There's an awfol lot of work that has to be
done around here, because she's not as careful with her home duties as she is with
man-in-the-moon marigolds ... Me? What would you want with me up on the stage? ...
[Give Nanny a napkin.+ fl The other mothers can do as they please .. .I would have
thought you had enough in your history without. . .I'll think about it. .. Goodbye, Dr.
Berg ... I SAID I'D THINK ABOUT IT!

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

RUTH: What did he say?
BEATRICE: How could you do this to me? HOW COULD YOU LET THAT MAN
CALL OUR HOME! I have no clothes, do you hear me? I'd look just like you up on
the stage, ugly little you! DO YOU WANT THEM TO LAUGH AT US? LAUGH
ATTHETWOOFUS?
RUTH: Mother. .. aren't you proud of her? Mother. .. it's an honor.
TILLIE: But ... nobody laughed at me.
BEATRICE: Oh, my God ...
[Someone help Nanny.+ fJ !Music. - fJ

11.i
[Applause.+ mj*(audience took it up)+ (End applause.+ mJ*(audience took it up)+
RUTH: The only competition you have to worry about is Janice Vickery. They say she
caught it near Princess Bay Boulevard and it was still alive when she took the skin off
it.
TILLIE: Let me do that please, Ruth.
RUTH: I'm sorry I touched them, really.
TILLIE: Why don't you feed Peter?
RUTH: Because I don't feel like feeding him ... Now I feel like feeding him. I heard that
it screamed for three minutes after she put it in because the water wasn't boiling yet.
How much talent does it take to boil the skin off a cat and then stick the bones
together again? That's what I want to know. Ugh. I had a dream about that, too. I
figure she did it in less than a day and she ends up as one of the top five
winners ... and you spend months growing atomic flowers.
TILLIE: Don't you think you should finish getting ready?
[Take off your shirt. - fJ
RUTH: Finish? This is it!
TILLIE: Are you going to wear that sweater?
RUTH: Look, don't worry about me. I'm not getting up on any stage, and if I did I
wouldn't be caught dead with a horrible bow like that.
TILLIE: Mother put it RUTH: They're going to laugh you off the stage again like when you cranked that atom
in assembly .. .! didn't mean that...The one they're going to laugh at is Mama.
TILLIE: What?
RUTH: I said the one they're going to laugh at is Mama ... Oh, let me take that bow off.
TILLIE: It's all right.
RUTH: Look, just sit still. I don't want everybody making fun of you.
TILLIE: What made you say that about Mama?
RUTH: Oh, I heard them talking in the Science Office yesterday. Mr. Goodman and
Miss Hanley. She's getting $12.63 to chaperon the thing tonight.
TILLIE: What were they saying?
RUTH: Miss Hanley was telling Mr: Goodman about Mama ... when she found out you
were one of the five winners. And he wanted to know if there was something wrong
with Mama because she sounded crazy over the phone. And Miss Hanley said she

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

was crazy and she always has been crazy and she can't wait to see what she looks like
after all these years. Miss Hanley said her nickname used to be Betty the Loon.
TILLIE: Ruth, you're hurting me.
RUTH: She was just like you and everybody thought she was a big weirdo. There! You
look much better! Peter, if anybody stuck you in a pot of boiling water I'd kill them,
do you know that? ... What do they call boiling the skin off a cat? I call it murder,
that's what I call it. [Put him in the oven.+ fl They say it was hit by a car and Janice
just scooped it up and before you could say bingo it was screaming in a pot of boiling
water. .. Do you know what they're all waiting to see? Mama's feathers! That's what
Miss Hanley said. She said Marna blabs as though she was the Queen of England and
just as proper as can be, and that her idea of getting dressed up is to put on all the
feathers in the world and go as a bird. Always trying to get somewhere, like a great
big bird.
TILLIE: Don't tell Mama, please. It doesn't matter.
RUTH: I was up there watching her getting dressed and sure enough, she's got the
feathers out.
TILLIE: You didn't tell her what Miss Hanley said?
RUTH: Are you kidding? I just told her I didn't like the feathers and I didn't think she
should wear any. But I'll bet she doesn't listen to me.
TILLIE: It doesn't matter.
RUTH: It doesn't matter? Do you think I want to be laughed right out of the school
tonight, with Chris Burns there, and all? Laughed right out of the school, with your
electric hair and her feathers on that stage, and Miss Hanley splitting her sides?
TILLIE: Promise me you won't say anything.
RUTH: On one condition.
TILLIE: What?
RUTH: Give Peter to me.
TILLIE: The taxi will be here any minute and I won't have all this stuff ready. Did you
see my speech?
RUTH: I mean it. Give Peter to me.
TILLIE: He belongs to all ofus.
RUTH: For me. All for me. What do you care? He doesn't mean anything to you
anymore, now that you've got all those crazy plants.
TILLIE: Will you stop?
RUTH: If you don't give him to me I'm going to tell Marna that everybody's waiting to
laugh at her.
TILLIE: Where are those typewritten cards"
RUTH: I MEAN IT! Give him to me!
TILLIE: Does he mean that much to you?
RUTH: Yest
[Throw him on the floor. - fl
TILLIE: All right.
RUTH: Betty the Loon ... That's what they used to call her, you know. Betty the Loon!
TILLIE: I don't think that's very nice.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

RUTH: First they had Betty the Loon, and now they've got Tillie the Loon ... You don't
have to wony about me turning you in for any old plants ... How much does a taxi cost
from here to the school?
TILLIE: Not much.
RUTH: I wish she'd give me the mouey it costs for a taxi- and for all that cardboard and
paint and flowerpots and stuff. The only time she ever made a fuss over me was when
she drove me nuts.
TILLIE: Tell her to huny, please.
RUTH: By the way, I went over to see Janice Vickery' s pot, that she did you know what
in, and I started telling her and her mother about the wonns in Mr. Alexander
Brougham's legs, and I got thrown out because it was too near dinner time. That Mrs.
Vickery kills me. She can't stand worms in somebody else's legs but she lets her
daughter cook a cat.
TILLIE: Mother! The taxi will be here any minute.
BEATRICE: You're lucky I'm coming, without all this rushing me.
TILLIE: Mama, you look beautiful.
BEA TRICE: Don't put it on too thick. I said I'd go and I guess there's no way to get out
of it. Do you mind telling me how I'm supposed to get up on the stage? Do they call
my name or what? And where are you going to be? If you ask me, they should've sent
all the parents a mimeographed sheet of instructions. If this is supposed to be such a
great event, why don't they do it right?
TILLIE: You just sit on the stage with the other parents before it begins.
BEATRICE: How long is this going to last? And remember, I don't care even if you do
win the whole damn thing, I'm not making any speech. I can hold my own anywhere,
but I hated that school when I went there and I hate it now ... and the only thing I'd
have to say is, what a pack of stupid teachers and vicious children they have. Imagine
someone tearing the skin off a cat.
RUTH: She didn't tear it. She boiled it off.
BEATRICE: You just told me upstairs that girl tore the skin off with an orange knife
and ... do you !mow, sometimes you exasperate me? If you've got all the plants in this
box, I can manage the folding thing. Do you know I've got a headache from doing
those titles? And you probably don't even like them.
TILLIE: I like them very much.
BEATRICE: Look, if you don't want me to go tonight, I don't have to. You're about as
enthusiastic as a dummy about this whole thing.
TILLIE: I'm sorry.
BEATRICE: And I refose to let you get nervous. Put that bow back in your hair.
RUTH: I took it out.
BEATRICE: What did you do that for''
RUTH: Because it made her look crazy.
BEATRICE: How would you know what's crazy or not? If that sweater of yours was
any tighter if d cut off the circulation in your chest. The bow looks very nice in your
hair. There's nothing wrong with looking proper, Matilda, and if you don't have
enough money to look expensive and perfect, people like you for trying to look nice.
You know, one day maybe you will be pretty. You'll have some nice features, when

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

that hair revives and you do some tricks with makeup. I hope you didn't crowd the
plants too close together. Did you find your speech?
TILLIE: Yes, mother.
BEATRICE: You know, Matilda, I was wondering about something. Do you think
you're really going to win 7 I mean, not that you won't be the best, but there's so
much politics in school. Don't laugh, but if there's anyone who's an expert on that,
it's me, and someday I'm going to write a book and blast that school to pieces. If
you're just a little bit different in this world, they try to kill you off.
RUTH: Tillie gave Peter to me.
BEATRICE: Oh? Then you inherited the rabbit droppings I found upstairs. What are
you doing with your coat on?
RUTH: I'm going out to wait for the taxi.
BEATRICE: Oh, no you're not. You start right in on the rabbit droppings. Or you won't
get another cigarette even if you scratch my back with an orange knife.
RUTH: I'm going down to the school with you.
BEATRICE: Oh, no you're not! You're going to keep company with that corpse in
there. If she wakes up and starts gagging just slip her a shot of whiskey. Quick! Grab
the plants, Matilda - I' 11 get the big thing.
RUTH: I want to go! I promised Chris Bums I'd meet him.
BEATRICE: Can't you understand English?
RUTH: I've got to go!
BEATRICE: Shut up!
RUTH: I don't care! [Slap her. - fJ I'M GOING ANYWAY!
BEATRICE: WHAT DID YOU SAY?
TILLIE: Mother!
BEATRICE: Hurry up with that box, Matilda, and tell him to stop blowing the horn.
HURRY UP! I don't know where you ever got the idea you were going tonight. Did
you think nobody was going to hold down the fort? ... Now you know how I felt all
those years you and everybody else was running out whenever they felt like it because there was always me to watch over the fifty-dollar-a-week corpse. If there's
one thing I demand it's respect. 1 don't ask for anything from you but respect.
RUTH: Why are you ashamed ofme?
BEATRICE: I've been seen with a lot worse than yo·u. I don't even know why I'm going
tonight, do you know that? Do you think I give one goddainn about the whole
thing? ... Do you want to know why I'm going? Do you really want to know why this
once somebody else has to stick with that dried prnne for a few minutes? Because this
is the first time in my life I've ever felt just a little bit proud over something. Isn't that
silly? Somewhere in the back of this turtle-sized brain of mine I feel just a little
proud! [IN - fJ Jesus Christ! And you begrudge me even that, you little bastard.
RUTH: Hurry up. They're waiting for you ... [Tell us - (cuts herself off). - fl They're
all waiting for you.
BEATRICE: I hope the paint is dry ... Who's waiting for me?
RUTH: Everybody ... including Miss Hanley. [Don't tell her. - fJ [Head out the door.
- f] She's been telling all the teachers ... [Honk the horn again. - fJ about you ... and
they're all waiting.
[Accept it and leave. - fJ

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE: You're such a little liar, Ruth, do you know that 7 When you can't have
what you want, you try to ruin it for everybody else.
RUTH: Goodnight, Betty the Loon.
[Accept it and leave. - ml [chorus of "Go." and "Just go."]
BEATRICE: Talce this thing.
RUTH: What for?
BEATRICE: Go with Matilda.
RUTH: I don't want to go now.
BEATRICE: GET OUT OF HERE!
RUTH: Now Tillie's going to blame it on me that you're not going - and take the rabbit
back. 1 can't help it what people caU you. I'll tell Tillie you'll be down later, all
right? ... Don't answer me. What do I care!
[Go back in time and let the mother go.+ ml [Throw yourself out the window.+ fJ
[Kill nanny. + ml [Spotlight. - fJ [Go anywav. - fJ [IN + f] [Lay on the
couch. - fJ [Let them see how pretty you are. - f[ [Cheer up. + f]
II.ii
[Oh Jesus Christ. - f[ [Boo! -f[
JANICE: The Past: I got the cat from the A.S.P.C.A. immediately after it had been
killed by a high-altitude pressure system. [Forget your speech. - f[ That explains
why some of the rib bones [Stop smiling. - ml are missing, because that method
sucks the air out of the animal's lungs and ruptures all cavities. They say it prevents
cruelty to animals but I think it's horrible. Then I boiled the cat in a sodium
hydroxide solution until most of the skin pulled right off, but I had to scrape some of
the grizzle off the joints with a knife. You have no idea how difficult it is to get right
down to the bones. I have to go on to The Present, now - but I did want to tell you
how long it took me to put the thing together. I mean, as it is now, it's extremely
useful for students of anatomy, even with the missing rib bones, and it can be used to
show basic anatomical aspects of many, many animals that are in the same family as
felines. I suppose that's about the only present uses I can think for it, but it is nice to
remember as an accomplishment, and it looks good on college applications to show
you did something else in school besides dating. The Future: The only future plans I
have fot Tabby - my little brother asked the A.S.P.C.A. what its name was when he
went to pick it np and they said it was called Tabby, but I think they were kidding
him -I mean as far as future plans, I'm going to donate it to the science department,
of course, and next year, if there's another Science Fair perhaps I'll do the same thing
with a dog. Thank you very much for your attention, and I hope I win!
II.iii
BEATRICE: I want to talk to the principal, please ... Well, you'll have to get him down
off the stage ... lt's none of your goddamn business who I am! ... Oh, I see ... Yes. I have
a message for him and Mr. Goodman, and you, too ... And this is for Miss Hanley,
too ... [Curse a lot. - f] Tell them Mrs. Hunsdorfer called to thank them for making
her wish she was dead ... Would you give them that message, please? ... Thank you
very much.
[Rip it off the wall. - f] [Boil the rabbit. - f[ I(to previous comment) Jesus. - f[

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE: Hello. This is Mrs. Hnnsdorfer .. .l'm sorry if I frightened you, I wouldn't
want you to think Nanny had deceased or anything like that - I can imagine how
terrible you'd feel if anything like that ever happened ... !Slur your words. - fl
Terrible tragedy that would be, Miss Career Woman of the Year. .. Yes, I'll tell you
why I'm calling. I want her out of here by tomorrow. I told you when you rolled her
in here I was going to try her out for a while and if I didn't like her she was to get the
hell out. Well I don't like her, so get her the hell out. .. It's like this. I don't like the
way she cheats at solitaire. Is that a good enough reason?...Fine. And if she's not out
of here by noon I'll send her collect in an ambulance, you son of a bitch!
[Woo! - fl [Dance. - m] [Where's Nanny? - fJ [chorus of "No." "Don't do it."
"Don't hurt the bunny."]
[New music. - fl
II.iv
TILLIE: The Past: The seeds were exposed to various degrees ... of gamma rays from
radiation sources in Oak Ridge ... Mr. Goodman helped me pay for the seeds ... Their
growth was plotted against.. .time. The Present: The seeds which received little
radiation have grown to plants which are normal in appearance. The seeds which
received moderate radiation gave rise to mutations such as double blooms, giant
stems, and variegated leaves. The seeds closest to the gamma source were killed or
yielded dwarf plants. The Future: After radiation is better understood, a day will
come when the power of exploding atoms will change the whole world we know.
Some of the mutations will be good ones - wonderful things beyond our dreams and I believe, I believe this with all my heart, THE DAY WILL COME WHEN
MANKIND WILL THANK GOD FOR THE STRANGE AND BEAUTIFUL
ENERGY FROM THE ATOM.
[Aw. - fl [Lightning. + fJ

11.v
RUTH: MAMA! MAMA! She won! Mama! Where are you 0 She won! Hurry up! Hurry!
Oh, my God, I can't believe it! Mama! Come on down! Hurry! Give me that! Mama!
Wait till you see this! [Jump on the couch in excitement. - fl Mama! She won ...
Didn't you hear me? Tillie won the whole thing! ... Mama? ... Wbat's the matter with
you? What did you rip the paper off the windows for?
TILLIE: Mama 7 Are you going to open a ... shop?
RUTH: What's the matter? Can't you even answer?
BEATRICE: Hand me some of those tacks.
RUTH: I SAID SHE WON 1 ARE YOU DEAF?
BEATRICE: Ruth, if you don't shut up I'm going to have you put away.
RUTH: They ought to put you away, BETTY THE LOON!
BEA TRICE: The rabbit is in your room. I want you to bury it in the morning.
RUTH: If you did anything ... I'LL KILL YOU 1
TILLIE: Mother, you didn't kill it, did you?
BEATRICE: Nanny goes tomorrow. First thing tomorrow.
TILLIE: Ruth? Are you all right?

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

BEATRICE: I don't know what it's going to be. Maybe a tea shop. Maybe not. After
school you're going to have regular hours. You'll work in the kitchen, you'll learn
how to cook, and you're going to earn your keep, just like in any other business.
TILLIE: Mama .. .I think she's going to go. Don't go ... don't go ... Help me! Mama! Help
me!
BEATRICE: Snap out of it, do you hear me? RUTH, DON'T LET YOURSELF GO!
Help me get her downstairs!
BEATRICE: Get the wooden spoon!
TILLIE: Shall I call the doctor? ... Shall I call the doctor 7
BEATRICE: No. She'll be all right.
TILLIE: I think we should call him.
BEATRICE: I DIDN'T ASK YOU WHAT YOU THOUGHT! ... We're going to need
every penny to get this place open.
TILLIE: I'd better bury him in the backyard.
BEATRICE: Don't bury the towel.
TILLIE: I'll do it in the morning.
[Ruth. get up and kill your mother. - fl [Runaway. Tillie. - fl
[Nanny. come
onstage. - m)(interestingly, sounds of disapproval after this suggestion) [Move in
fast motion. - fl [Red lighting. - fl
BEATRICE: Matilda?
TILLIE: Yes, Mama?
BEATRICE: I hate the world. Do you kuow that, Matilda?
TILLIE: Yes, Mama.
BEA TRICE: I hate the world.
TILLIE: The Conclusion: My experiment has shown some of the strange effects
radiation can produce ... and how dangerous it can be if not handled correctly. Mr.
Goodman said I should tell in this conclusion what my future plans are and how this
experiment has helped me make them. For one thing, the effect of gamma rays on
man-in-the-moon marigolds has made me curious about the sun and the stars, for the
universe itself must be like a world of great atoms - and I want to know more about
it. But most important, I suppose, my experiment has made me feel important - every
atom in me, in everybody, has come from the sun - from places beyond our dreams.
The atoms of our hands, the atoms of our hearts ... Atom. Atom. What a beautiful
word.

THE END

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

APPENDIXG
AUDIENCE TRANSCRIPT
Nov. 3, 2006 Friday 7:30 pm
KEY:
[response] : spectator's response
m : male spectator
f : female spectator
l=l : no response, or negative response from the audience to the comment
[±] : positive response from audience to comment, typically laughter
* : suggestion was taken up by performer or tech
- : no reaction, or negative reaction, to the enacted suggestion by the audience
+ : positive reaction, typically laughter, to the enacted suggestion by the audience
# : spectator suggested something moments before it was scheduled to happen

EXAMPLE:
[Act.+ m]*- : A male spectator shouted out, "Act." The audience responded to this
suggestion with laughter. Subsequently, an-actor accepted the suggestion and enacted
it. This time, however, the audience did not react, or reacted negatively, to the actor's
enactment.

I.i
[Turn the lights up. - m]
TILLIE'S VOICE: He told me to look at my hand, for a part of it came from a star that
exploded too long ago to imagine. This part of me was formed from a tongue of fire
that screamed through the heavens until there was our sun. And this part of me - this
tiny part of me - was on the sun when it itself exploded and whirled in a great storm
until the planets came to be. And this small part of me was then a whisper of the
earth. When there was life, perhaps this part of me·got lost in a fem that was crushed
and covered until it was coal. And then it was a diamond millions of years later - it
must have been a diamond as beautiful as the star from which it had first come. Or
perhaps this part of me became lost in a terrible beast, or became part of a huge bird
that flew above the primeval swamps. And he said this thing was so small - this part
of me was so small it couldn't be seen - but it was there from the begirming of the
world. And he called this bit of me an atom. And when he wrote the word, I fell in
love with it. Atom. Atom. What a beautiful word.
I.ii
BEATRICE: [IN - m] Will you get that please? No help! Never any help! Hello? Yes it
is. Who is this? .. .I hope there hasn't been any trouble at school. .. Oh, she's always
been like that. She hardly says a word around here, either. I always say some people
were born to speak and others born to listen ... You know I've been meaning to call

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

you to thank you for that lovely rabbit you gave Matilda. She and I just adore it and
it's gotten so big ... Well, it certainly was thoughtful. Mr. Goodman, I don't mean to
change the subject but aren't you that delightful young man Tillie said hello to a
couple of months back at the A & P? You were by the lobster tank and I was near the
frozen foods? That delightful and handsome young man9 ... Why, I would very much
indeed use the expression handsome. Yes, and ... Well, I encourage her at every
opportunity at home. Did she say I didn't? Both my daughters have their own desks
and I put 75-watt bulbs right near them ... Yes ... Yes .. .I think those tests are very
much overrated, anyway, Mr. Goodman ... Well, believe me she's nothing like that
around this house ... Now I don't want you to think I don't appreciate what you're
trying to do, Mr. Goodman, but I'm afraid it's simply useless. I've tried just
everything, but she isn't a pretty girl - I mean, let's be frank about it - she's going to
have her problems. Are you married, Mr. Goodman? Oh, that's too bad. I don't know
what's the matter with women today letting a handsome young man like you get
away ... Well, some days she just doesn't feel like going to school. You just said how
bright she is, and I'm really afraid to put too much of a strain on her after what
happened to her sister. You know, too much strain is the worst thing in this modern
world, Mr. Goodman, and I can't afford to have another convulsive on my hands,
now can I? But don't you worry about Matilda. There will be some place for her in
this world. And, like I said, some were born to speak and others just to listen ... and do
call again, Mr. Goodman. It's been a tme pleasure speaking with you. Goodbye.
BEA TRICE: Matilda, that wasn't very nice of you to tell them I was forcibly detaining
you from school. Why, the way that Mr. Goodman spoke, he must think I'm running
a concentration camp. Do you have any idea how embarrassing it is to be accused of
mnning a concentration camp for your own children? Well, it isn't embarrassing at
all. That school of yours is forty years behind the times anyway, and believe me you
learn more around here than that ugly Mr. Goodman can teach you! You know, I
really feel sorry for him. I never saw a man with a more effeminate face in my life.
When I saw you talking to him by the lobster tank I said to myself, "Good Lord, for a
science teacher my poor girl has got herself a Hebrew hermaphrodite." Of course,
he's not as bad as Miss Hanley. The idea of letting her teach girl's gym is staggering.
And you have to place me in the embarrassing position of giving them a reason to call
me at eight-thirty in the morning, no less.
TILLIE: I didn't say anything.
BEA TRICE: What do you tell them when they want to know why you stay home once
in a while?
TILLIE: I tell them I'm sick.
BEATRICE: Oh, you're sick all right, the exact nature of the i11ness not fully realized,
but you're sick all right. Any daughter that would turn her mother in as administrator
of a concentration camp has got be suffering from something very peculiar.
[Talk back, Matilda. - ml
TILLIE: Can I go in today, Mother?
BEATRICE: You'll go in, all right.
TILLIE: Mr. Goodman said he was going to do an experiment BEATRICE: Why, he looks like the kind that would do his experimenting after
sundown.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

TILLIE: On radioactivity BEATRICE: On radioactivity? That's all that high school needs!
TILLIE: He's going to bring in the cloud chamber BEATRICE: Why, what an outstanding event. If you had warned me yesterday I
would've gotten all dressed to kill and gone with you today. I love seeing cloud
chambers being brought in.
TILLIE: You can actually seeBEATRICE: You're giving me a headache.
TILLIE: Please?
BEATRICE: No, my dear, the fortress of knowledge is not going to be blessed with your
presence today. I have a good number of exciting duties for you to take care of, not
the least of which is rabbit droppings.
[Chug it. Chug it. -fl
TILLIE: Oh, Mother, please ... I'll do it after school.
BEATRICE: If we wait a minute longer this house is going to ferment. I found rabbit
droppings in my bedroom even.
TILLIE: I could do it after Mr. Goodman's class. I'll say I'm ill and ask for a sick pass.
BEATRICE: Do you want me to chloroform that thing right this minute?
TILLIE: No!
BEATRICE: Then shut up.
RUTH: Do you have Devil's Kiss down there?
BEATRICE: It's in the bathroom cabinet.
RUTH: There's so much junk inhere it's driving me crazy.
BEATRICE: Maybe it's in my purse ... If you don't hurry up you'll be late for school.
RUTH: Well, I couldn't very well go in without Devil's Kiss, now could I?
BEATRICE: Doesn't anyone go to school these days without that all over their lips?
RUTH: Nobody I know, except Tillie, that is. And if she had a little lipstick on I'll bet
they wouldn't have laughed at her so much yesterday.
BEATRICE: Why were they laughing?
RUTH: The assembly. Didn't she tell you about the assembly?
BEATRICE: Ruth, you didn't tell me she was in an assembly.
RUTH: Well, I just thought of it right now. How could I tell you anything until I think of
it - did you ever stop to consider that? Some crummy science assembly.
BEATRICE: What is she talking about?
RUTH: I thought she'd tell the whole world. Imagine, right in front of the assembly, with
everybody laughing at her.
BEATRICE: Will you be quiet, Ruth? Why were they laughing at you?
TILLIE: I don't know.
RUTH: You don't know? My heavens, she was a sight. She had that old jumper on - the
faded one with that low collar - and a raggy slip that showed all over and her hair
looked like she was struck by lightning.
BEATRICE: You're exaggerating ...
RUTH: She was cranking this model of something TILLIE: The atom.
RUTH: This model of the atom ... you know, it had this crank and a long tower so that
when you turned it, these little colored balls went spinning around like crazy. And

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

there was Tillie, cranking away, looking weird as a coot. .. that old jmnper with the
raggy slip and the lightning hair ... cranking away while some boy with glasses was
reading this stupid speech ... and everybody burst into laughter until the teachers
yelled at them. And all day long, the kids kept coming up to me saying, "Is that really
your sister? How can you bear it?" And you kuow, Chris Bums says to me - "She
looks like the one that went to the looney doctors." I could have kissed him there and
then.
BEATRICE: Matilda, if you can't get yourself dressed properly before going to school,
you're never going to go again. I don't like the idea of everybody laughing at you,
because when they laugh at you they're laughing at me. And I don't want you
cranking any more ... atoms.
RUTH: You're almost out of Devil's Kiss.
BEATRICE: If you didn't put so much on it would last longer.
RUTH: Who was that calling?
BEATRICE: Matilda turned me in to the Gestapo.
RUTH: Can I earn a cigarette this morning?
BEATRICE: Why not?
(Ask for a cigarette, Matilda- ml*- (Put it out on the conch. - ml
RUTH: Was it Mr. Goodman?
BEATRICE: Who?
RUTH: The call this morning. Was it Mr. Goodman?
BEATRICE: Yes.
RUTH: I figured it would be.
BEA TRICE: A little higher, please.
· RUTH: There?
BEATRICE: Yes, there ...Why did you figure it would be Mr. Goodman?
RUTH: Well, he called me out of sewing class yesterday - I remember because my
blouse wasn't all buttoned - and he wanted to kuow why Tillie's out of school so
much.
BEATRICE: Lower. A little lower. .. And what did you tell him?
RUTH: I wish you'd go back to Kools. I liked Kools better.
TILLIE: What did you tell him?
RUTH: I told him you were ill, and he wanted to know what kind, so I told him you had
leprosy.
TILLIE: You didn't!
RUTH: You should have seen his face. He was so cute. And I told him you had
ringworm and gangrene.
BEA TRI CE: What did he say?
RUTH: And I told him you had what Mother's last patient had ... whatchamacallit?
BEATRICE: Psoriasis 9
RUTH: Yeah. Something like that.
TILLIE: Tell nae you didn't, Ruthi
RUTH: OK. I didn't. .. (IN - m( But I really did.
BEATRICE: He knew you were joking.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

RUTH: And then I told him to go look up the history and then he'd find out. Whenever
they go look up the history then they don't bother me anymore 'cause they think I'm
crazy.
BEATRICE: Ruth RUTH: And I told him the disease you had was fatal and that there wasn't much hope for
you.
BEA TRICE: What kind of history is it?
RUTH: Just a little folder with the story of our lives in it, that's all.
BEA TRI CE: How did you ever see it?
RUTH: I read the whole thing last term when Miss Hanley dragged me into the record
room because I didn't want to climb the ropes in gym and I told her my skull was
growing.
BEATRICE: A little lower, please.
RUTH: Lower! Higher! I wish you'd make up your mind. If you'd switch back to Kools
it might be worth it, but ugh! these are awful. You know, I really did think my skull
was growing. Either that or a tumor. So she dragged me out of gym class, and she
thought I couldn't read upside down while she was sitting opposite me with the
history. But I could.
BEATRICE: What does it say?
RUTH: Oh, it says you're divorced and that I went crazy ... and my father took a heart
attack at Star Lale ... and now you're a widow BEATRICE: That's it! Hold it right there! Aaah!
RUTH: And it says that I exaggerate and tell stories and that I'm afraid of death and
have nightmares ... and all that stuff.
BEATRICE: And what else does it say?
RUTH: I can't remember everything you know. Remember this, remember that ...
remember this, that. ..

I.iii
TILLIE'S VOICE: Today I saw it. Behind the glass a white cloud began to form. He
placed a small piece of metal in the center of the chamber and we waited until I saw
the first one - a trace of smoke that came from nowhere and then disappeared. And
then another ... and another, until I knew it was coming from the metal. They looked
like water-sprays from a park fountain, and they went on and on for as long as I
watched. And he told me the fountain of smoke would come forth for a long time, and
if I had wanted to, I could have stayed there all my life and it would never have ended
- that fountain, so close I could have touched it. In front of my eyes, one part of the
world was becoming another. Atoms exploding, flinging off tiny bullets that caused
the fountain, atom after atom breaking down into something new. And no one could
stop the fmmtain. It would go on for millions of years - on and on, this fountain from
eternity.
I.iv
BEATRICE: I thought we had everything, but leave it to you to think of the one thing
we're missing ... Twenty-two acres in Prince's Bay. Small pond. $6,000 ... That's
cheap. I'd take a look at it if I had any money ... What kind of seeds are they?

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

TILLIE: Marigolds. They've been exposed to cobalt-60.
BEATRICE: If there's one thing I've always wanted, it's been a living room planted
with marigolds that have been exposed to cobalt-60. While you're at it, why don't
you throw in a tomato patch in the bathroom?
TILLIE: Just let me keep them here for a week or so until they get started and then I'll
transplant them to the backyard.
BEATRICE: Four-family house. Six and a half and six and a half over five and five.
Eight garages. I could really do something with that. A nursing home ... Don't think
I'm not kicking myself that I didn't finish that real estate course. I should have
finished beauty school, too ... God, what I could do with eight garages ... You know,
I'm thinking of getting rid of that and making this place into something.
TILLIE: Yes.
BEATRICE: I've been thinking about a tea shop. Have you noticed there aren't many of
them around anymore?
TILLIE: Yes.
BEATRICE: And this is just the type of neighborhood where a good tea shop could
make a go of it. We'd have a good cheesecake. You've got to have a good
cheesecake ... Eight times ten- well, eight times eight, if they're falling down - that's
sixty-four dollars a month from the garages alone .. .I swear money makes money.
BEATRICE: What is cobalt-60?
TILLIE: It's something that causes ... changes in seeds. Oh, Mother - he set the cloud
chamber up just for me and he told me about radioactivity and half-life and he got the
seeds for me.
BEATRICE: What does half-life mean?
TILLIE: The half-life of Polonium-210 is one hundred and forty days. The half-life of
Radium-226 is one thousand five hundred and ninety years. The half-life of Uranium238 is four and one-half billion years.
BEATRICE: Do you know you're giving me a headache? LOOK WHO'S THERE! IT'S
NANNY! NANNY CAME ALL THE WAY OUT HERE BY HERSELF! I'm going
to need a cigarette for this. NANNY! YOU COME SIT DOWN AND WE'LL BE
RIGHT WITH HER! (Old woman, get a cookie. - ml*+ You know, sometimes I've
got to laugh. I've got this on my hands and all you're worried about is planting
marigolds. I'VE GOT HOTSY WATER FOR YOU, NANNY. WOULD YOU LIKE
SOME HOTSY WATER AND HONEY? I've (Drop the cup. - m) never seen it to
fail. Every time I decide to have a cup of coffee 1 see that face at the curtains. I
wonder what she'd do .. .if I just poured this right over her head. I'll be she wouldn't
even notice it. NANNY'S GOING TO GET JUST WHAT SHE NEEDS! You know
if someone told me when I was young that I'd end up feeding honey to a zombie, I'd
tell them they were crazy. SOMETHING WRONG, NANNY? OH, DID I FORGET
NANNY'S SPOON? MERCY! MERCY! I FORGOT NANNY'S SPOON! I'll give
you a spoon, Nauny, I'll give you a spoon. Matilda' Watch me give Nanny her spoon.
(Throw the water in her face. - ml A SPOON FOR NANNY' Fifty dollars a week.
Fifty dollars. I look at you, Narmy, and I wonder if it's worth it. I think I'd be better
off driving a cab. TAKE HONEY, NANNY. HONEY WITH HOTSY WATER!
(Take the cup from her. - ml You should have seen her danghter bring her here last
week .. .! could have used you that day ... She came in pretending she was Miss Career

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Woman of the Year. She said she was in real estate and such a busy little woman,
such a busy little woman - she just couldn't give all the love and care and affection
her little momsy needed anymore ... Nanny's quite a little cross to bear, now aren't
you, Nanny dear? (Tillie, help the old woman. - ml But you're a little better than
Mr. Mayo was - with the tumor on his brain - or Miss Marion Minto with her cancer,
or Mr. Brougham ... what was his first name?
JIN - ml
TILLIE: Alexander.
BEATRICE: Mr. Alexander Brougham with the worms in his legs. WHY, NANNY'S
QUITE SOME LITTLE GIRL, AREN'T YOU, NANNY? JIN - ml A GIRL
DRINKING HER HOTSY AND HONEY! ... Cobalt-60. Ha! You take me for a fool,
don't you?
TILLIE: No, Mother.
BEA TRICE: Science, science, science! Don't they teach our misfits anything anymore?
Anything decent and meaningful and sensitive? Do you know what I'd be now if it
wasn't for this mud pool I got sucked into? I'd probably be a dancer. Miss Betty
Frank, The Best Dancer of the Class of I 9 ... (Dance. - ml*- something. (Throw the
towel at the old woman. - ml One minute I'm the best dancer in school - smart as a
whip - the head of the whole crowd! And the next minute ... One mistake. That's how
it starts. Marry the wrong man and before you know it he's got you tied down with
two stones around your neck for the rest of your life. When I was in that lousy high
school I was one of the most respected kids you ever saw. I used to wonder why
people always said, "Why, just yesterday ... why, just yesterday ... why, just
yesterday ... " Before I knew what happened I lost my dancing legs and got varicose
legs. Beautifol varicose legs. (Show us more. + mj Do you know, everything I ever
thought I'd be has exploded! NANNY, YOU HURRY UP WITH THAT HONEY!
Exploded! You know, I ahnost forgot about everything I was supposed to
be ... NANNY'S ALMOST FINISHED. ISN'T THAT WONDERFUL" She's almost
finished, all right. NANNY'S DAUGHTER IS COMING TO SEE YOU SOON.
WILL THAT MAKE NANNY HAPPY? The day Miss Career Woman of the Year
comes to visit again I think I'll drop dead. Nobody's too busy for anything they want
to do, don't you tell me. What kind of idiot do people take me for? NANNY,
YOU'RE SPILLING YOUR HOTSY 1 JESUS CHRIST 1 You know, I ought to kick
you right out and open that tea shop tomorrow. (Drink the beer, Nanny. + m( Oh,
it's coming. I can feel it. And the first thing I'll do is get rid of that rabbit.
TILLIE: Yes, Mother.
BEATRICE: You think I'm kidding?
(Take the beer, old woman. - m]
TILLIE: No, I don't.
BEATRICE: You bet I'm not 1 I was going to do this a month ago. Here it is. Here's a
new word for you. Trichloro ... methane. Do you know what that is, Matilda? Well,
it's chlorofonn! I'm saving it for that Angora manure machine of yours. Speaking of
manure machines, IS NANNY READY TO GO MAKE DUTY? NANNY IS
ALWAYS READY FOR DUTY, AREN'T YOU NANNY? BECAUSE NANNY'S
A GOODY-GOODY GIRL AND GOODY-GOODY GIRLS ALWAYS GET

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

GOODY-GOODY THINGS. GOD LOOKS OUT FOR GOODY-GOODY GIRLS
AND GIVES THEM HOTSY AND HONEY - RIGHT, NANNY 9
BEATRICE: Half-life! If you want to know what a half-life is, just ask me. You're
looking at the original half-life! I got stuck with one daughter with half a mind;
another one who's half a test tube; half a husband - a house half full of rabbit crap and half a corpse! That's what I call a half-life, Matilda! Me and cobalt-60! Two of
the biggest half-lifes you ever saw!
I.v
BEATRICE: Hello - Mr. Goodman, please ... How would I know if he's got a
class? ... Hello, Mr. Goodman? Are you Mr. Goodman? ... Oh, I beg your pardon, Miss

Torgersen ... Yes, I'll wait. .. Couldn't you find him, Miss Torgersen? ... Oh! Excuse
me, Mr. Goodman. How are you? .. .l'll bet you'll never guess who this is - it's Mrs.
Hunsdorfer - remember the frozen foods? You know, Ruth told me she's your new
secretary and I certainly think that's a delight. You were paying so much attention to
Matilda that I'll bet Ruth just got jealous. She does things like that, you know. I hope
she works hard for you, although I can't imagine what kind of work Ruth could be
doing in that great big science office. She's a terrible snoop ... Your attendance? Isn't
that charming. And the cut cards! Imagine. You trust her with ... why, I didn't know
she could type at all .. .imagine. Well...I'll ... Of course, too much work isn't good for
anyone, either. No wonder she's failing everything. I mean, I never !mew a girl who
failed everything regardless of what they were suffering from .. .I suppose I should say
recovering from ... Well, it's about the seeds you gave Matilda ... Well, she's had them
in the house for a week now and they're starting to grow. Now, she told me they had
been subjected to radioactivity, and I hear such terrible things about radioactivity that
I automatically associate radioactivity with sterility, and it positively horrifies me to
have those seeds right here in my living room. Couldn't she just grow plain marigolds
like everyone else? Oh ... It does sound like an interesting project, but. .. No, I must
admit that at this very moment I don't know what a mutation is ... Mr. Goodman ...
Mr. Goodman 1 I don't want you to think I'm not interested, but please spare me
definitions over the phone. I'll go the library next week and pick me out some little
book on science and then I'll know all about mutations ... No, you didn't insult me,
but I just want you to know that I'm not stupid ... I just thought prevention was better
than a tragedy, Mr. Goodman. I mean, Matilda has enough problems to worry about
without sterility ... Well, I was just concerned, but-you've put my poor mother's heart
at ease. You know, really, our schools need more exciting young men like you, I
really mean that. Really. Oh, I do. Goodbye, Mr. Goodman.
I.vi
[Stop the storm. - m[
TILLIE: Mother! She's going to have one!
BEATRICE: Stop it 1 Stop it, Ruth 1
TILLIE: She's going!
BEATRICE: Ruth! Stop it!
TILLIE: She's going to go 1

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE: Shut up and get back in your room! You're not going to let yourself go, do
you hear me, Ruth? You're not going to go 1
RUTH: He's after me!
BEATRICE: You were dreaming, do you hear me? Nobody's after you! Nobody!
TILLIE: I saw her eyes start to go back BEATRICE: Get back in your room! There, now, nobody's after you. Nice and easy.
Breathe deeply ... Did the big bad man come after my little girl? [Make it a blackout.
- m] [Start convulsing. Ruth. - ml That big bad bogey man? Now that wasn't so
bad, was it?
RUTH: It was the dream, with Mr. Mayo again.
[Ruth. start freaking out. - ml
BEATRICE: Oh. Well, we'll just get you a little hot milk and -Why, the electricity's
gone off. Do you remember what happened to those candles?
RUTH: What candles?
BEATRICE: The little white ones from my birthday cake last year.
RUTH: Tillie melted them down for school a long time ago.
BEATRICE: She had no right to do that.
RUTH: She asked you. She used them to attach a paper straw to a milk bottle with a
balloon over it, and it was supposed to tell if it was going to rain.
[Turn the lights back on. - m [
BEATRICE: There! It works. I don't want her wasting anything of mine unless she's
positive I won't need it. You always need candles. Why, Ruth - your skin just turued
ice cold! This will warm you up ... What's the matter?
RUTH: The flashlight BEATRICE: What's wrong with it?
RUTH: It's the same one I used to check on Mr. Mayo with.
BEATRICE: So it is. We don't need it.
RUTH: No, let me keep it. [Tell a ghost story. - f[ Do you want to !mow how they have
it in the history?
BEA TRICE: No, I don't.
RUTH: Well, they say I came out of my room ... And I started down the stairs, step by
step ... and I heard the choking and banging on the bed, and ...
BEATRICE: I'm going back to bed.
RUTH:No!
BEATRICE: Well, talk about something nice, then.
RUTH: Oh, Mama, tell me about the wagon.
BEA TRICE: You change so fast I can't keep up with you.
RUTH: Mama,please ... the story about the wagon.
BEATRICE: I don't know anything about telling stories. Get those great big smart
teachers of yours to do that sort of stuff.
[Tell the story. - m)
RUTH: Tell me about the horses again, and how you stole the wagon.
BEATRICE: Don't get me started on that.
RUTH: Mama,please ...
BEATRICE: Do you want a cigarette?
[Nanny, come on stage.+ ml [No smoking in bed. - m[

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

RUTH: Leave out the part where they shoot the horses, though.
BEATRICE: Honey, you know the whole storyRUTH: "Apples! Pears! Cu ... cumbers!"
BEATRICE: No. It's "Apples! Pears! Cucum ... bers!"
BEATRICE AND RUTH: "Apples! Pears! Cucum .. .bers!"
RUTH: How did you get the wagon out without him seeing you?
BEATRICE: That was easy. Every time he got home for the day he'd make us both
some sandwiches - my mama had been dead for years - and he'd take a nap on the
old sofa that used to be ... there! And while he was sleeping I got the horses hitched up
and went riding around the block waving to everyone.
RUTH: Oh, Mama, you didn't!
BEATRICE: Of course I did. I had more nerve than a bear when I was a kid. Let me tell
you it takes nerve to sit up on that wagon every day yelling "Apples! ... Pears!
Cucum . .. bers!"
RUTH: Did he find out you took the wagon?
BEATRICE: Did he find out? He came running down the street after me and started
spanking me right on top of the wagon - not hard - but it was so embarrassing - and I
had one of those penny marshmallow ships in the back pocket of my overalls, and it
got all squished. And you better believe I never did it again ... You would have loved
him, Ruth, and gone out with him on the wagon ... all over Stapleton yelling as loud as
you wanted.
RUTH: "Apples! Pears! Cu .. .cumbers!"
BEATRICE: No!
RUTH: "Cucum .. .bers!"
[Come on stage, nanny. - m] [Ruth, tell her you're pregnant.+ m]
BEATRICE: My father made up for all the other men in this whole world, Ruth. If only
you two could have met. He'd only be about seventy now, do you realize that? And
I'll bet he'd still be selling vegetables around town. All that fun - and then I don't
thinlc I ever !mew what really hit me.
RUTH: Don't tell about BEATRICE: Don't worry about the horses.
RUTH: What hit you?
BEATRICE: Well it was just me and Papa ... and your father hanging around. And then
Papa got sick ... and I drove with him up to the sanatorium. And then I came home
and there were the horses RUTH: Mother!
BEATRICE: And I had the horses ... taken care of. fPlay a gunshot. - m] And then Papa
got terribly sick and he begged me to marry so that he'd be sure I'd be taken care of.
Ifhe !mew how I was taken care of he'd tum over in his grave. And nightmares! Do
you want to know the nightmare I used to have? [Play some drive-by music. + mJ I
never had nightmares over the fights with your father, or the divorce, or this
thrombosis - he deserved it - I never had nightmares over any of that. Let me tell you
about my nightmare that used to come back and back: Well, I'm on Papa's wagon, but
it's newer and shinier, and it's being pulled by beautiful white horses, not dirty
workhorses - these are like circus horses with long manes and [Play horse sounds. +
!!!l tinsel - and the wagon is blue, shiny blue. And it's full - filled with yellow apples

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

and grapes and green squash. You're going to laugh when you hear this. I'm wearing
a lovely gown with jewels all over it, and my hair is piled up on top of my head with
a long feather in it, and the bells are ringing. Huge bells swinging on a gold braid
strung across the back of the wagon, and they're going DONG, DONG ... DONG,
DONG. And I'm yelling "APPLES! PEARS! CUCUM ... BERS!"
[Make shadow puppets. - fl
RUTH: That doesn't sound like a nightmare to me.
[Tillie, come on stage. - m]
BEATRICE: And then I turn down our street and all the noise stops. This long street,
with all the doors of the houses shut and everything crowded next to each other, and
there's not a soul around. [(cuts himself oft) - m] And then I start getting afraid that
the vegetables are going to spoil. .. and that nobody's going to buy anything, and I feel
as though I shouldn't be on the wagon, and I keep trying to call out. But there isn't a
sound. Not a single sound. [Bring the puppet from Saw onstage. - m] Then I turn
my head and look at the house across the street. I see an upstairs window, and a pair
of hands pull the curtains slowly apart. I see the face ofmy father and my heart stands
still ... Ruth ... take the light out of my eyes.
RUTH: Is Nanny going to die here?
BEATRICE: No.
RUTH: How can you be sure?
BEATRICE: I can tell.
[Turn the lights back on. - m I
RUTH: Are you crying?
BEATRICE: What's left for me, Ruth?
RUTH: What, Mama?
BEATRICE: What's left for me?
I.vii
[Take a swig of the bottle. - m]
TILLIE: What are you doing?
BEATRICE: A little housecleaning, and you're going to help. You can start by getting
rid of that rabbit or I'll suffocate the bastard. You don't think I will, do you? You
wait and see. Where's Ruth? She's probably running around the schoolyard in her
brassiere.
TILLIE: Mother, they want me to do something at school.
BEATRICE: NANNY! DID YOU HEAR THAT? THEY WANT HER TO DO
SOMETHING AT SCHOOL! ISN'T THAT MOMENTOUS, NANNY? Well I want
you to do something around here. Like get rid of that bunny. I'm being generous! I'll
let you give it away. Far away. Give it to Mr. Goodman. I'd chloroform the thing
myself, but that crazy sister of yours would throw convulsions for fifty years ... and I
hate a house that vibrates. And get rid of those sterile marigolds. They stink! HI,
NANNY - HOW ARE YOU, HONEY? HOW WOULD YOU LIKE TO GO ON A
LONG TRIP? You see, everybody, I spent today taking stock of my life and I've
come up with zero. I added up all the separate departments and the total reads zero ...
zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero
zero ... And do you !mow how you pronounce that, with all your grammatical

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

schoolin'
and
foolin'?
You
pronounce
it
o,o,o,o,0,0,0,0,0,0,!
o,o,o,o,O,O,O,O,O,O,O,O 1 Right, Nanny? RIGHT, NANNY? So, by the end of the
week, you get rid of that cottontail compost heap [Throw the marigolds. + m) and
we'll get you a job down at the five-and-ten-cent store. And if you don't do so well
with the public, we'll fix you up with some kind of machine. Wouldn't that be nice?
RUTH: Can you believe it? I didn't, until Chris Bums came up and told me about it in
Geography, and then Mr. Goodman told me himself during the eighth period in the
office when I was eavesdropping. Aren't you so happy you could bust? Tillie') I'm so
proud I can't believe it, Mama. Everybody was talking about it and nobody ... well, it
was the first time they all came up screaming about her and I said, "Yes, she's my
sister!" I said it, "She's my sister! My sister! My sister!" Give me a cigarette.
BEATRICE: Get your hands off my personal property.
RUTH: I'll scratch your back later.
BEATRICE: I don't want you to touch me!
RUTH: Did he call yet? My God, I can't believe it, !just can't!
BEATRICE: Did who call yet?
RUTH: I'm not supposed to tell you, as Mr. Goodman's private secretary, but you're
going to get a call from school.
BEATRICE: What is she talking about?
TILLIE: I was in the Science Fair at school.
RUTH: Didn't she tell you yet 0 Oh, Tillie, how could you? She's fantastic, Mama! She's
a finalist in the Science Fair. There were only five of them out of hundreds and
hundreds. She won with all those plants over there. They're freaks! Isn't that a
scream? Dr. Berg picked her himself. The principal! And I heard Mr. Goodman say
she was going to be another Madam Pasteur and he never saw a girl do anything like
that before and ... so I told everybody, "Yes, she's my sister!" Tillie, "You're my
sister!" I said. And Mr. Goodman called the Advance and they're coming to take your
picture. Oh, Mama, isn't it crazy? And nobody laughed at her, Mama. She beat out
practically everybody and nobody laughed at her. "She's my sister," I said. "She's my
sister!" That must be him! Mama, answer it - I'm afraid. [Nanny, wake up. - f[
Answer it before he hangs up 1 [Answer it, Nanny.+ m) Mama! He's gonna hang up!
Hello? ... Yes ... It's him 1••• [Nanny, have night terrors.+ m) [(internal discussion
ensues)] Just a minute, please ... He wants to talk to you.
BEATRICE: Who?
RUTH: The principal!
BEATRICE: Hang up.
RUTH: I told him you were here! Mama!
[Talk to him. - m) [Be excited, Beatrice. - m)
BEATRICE: Yes? .. .! know who you are, Dr. Berg .. .I see ... Couldn't you get someone
else? There's an awful lot of work that has to be done around here, because she's not
as careful with her home duties as she is with man-in-the-moon marigolds ... Me?
What would you want with me up on the stage? ... The other mothers can do as they
please ... I would have thought you had enough in your history without .. .I'll think
about it. .. Goodbye, Dr. Berg ... I SAID I'D THINK ABOUT IT!
RUTH: What did he say?

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE: How could you do this to me? HOW COULD YOU LET THAT MAN
CALL OUR HOME! I have no clothes, do you hear me? I'd look just like you up on
the stage, ugly little you! [Throw the marigolds. - mJ DO YOU WANT THEM TO
LAUGH AT US? LAUGH AT THE TWO OF US?
RUTH: Mother. .. aren't you proud of her? Mother. .. it's an honor.
!Walk over to her. - fl [Tillie, defend yourself. - ml [Slap her.+ ml
TILLIE: But ... nobody laughed at me.
BEATRICE: Oh, my God ...
[Join in, Ruth. - ml

II.i
RUTH: The only competition you have to worry about is Janice Vickery. They say she
caught it near Princess Bay Boulevard and it was still alive when she took the skin off
it.
TILLIE: Let me do that please, Ruth.
RUTH: I'm sorry I touched them, really.
TILLIE: Why don't you feed Peter?
RUTH: Because I don't feel like feeding him ... Now I feel like feeding him. I heard that
it screamed for three minutes after she put it in because the water wasn't boiling yet.
How much talent does it take to boil the skin off a cat and then stick the bones
together again? That's what I want to know. Ugh. [Take the rabbit out of the cage.
- fj I had a dream about that, too. I figure she did it in less than a day and she ends up
as one of the top five winners ... and you spend months growing atomic flowers.
TILLIE: Don't you think you should finish getting ready?
RUTH: Finish? This is it!
TILLIE: Are you going to wear that sweater0
RUTH: Look, don't worry about me. I'm not getting up on any stage, and if I did I
wouldn't be caught dead with a horrible bow like that.
TILLIE: Mother put itRUTH: They're going to laugh you off the stage again like when you cranked that atom
in assembly .. .! didn't mean that ... The one they're going to laugh at is Mama.
TILLIE: What?
RUTH: I said the one they're going to laugh at is Mama ... Oh, let me take that bow off.
TILLIE: It's all right.
RUTH: Look, just sit still. I don't want everybody making fun of you.
TILLIE: What made you say that about Mama?
RUTH: Oh, I heard them talking in the Science Office yesterday. Mr. Goodman and
Miss Hanley. She's getting $12.63 to chaperon the thing tonight.
TILLIE: What were they saying?
RUTH: Miss Hanley was telling Mr. Goodman about Mama ... when she found out you
were one of the five winners. And he wanted to know if there was something wrong
with Mama because she sounded crazy over the phone. And Miss Hanley said she
was crazy and she always has been crazy and she can't wait to see what she looks like
after all these years. Miss Hanley said her nickname used to be Betty the Loon.
TILLIE: Ruth, you're hurting me.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

RUTH: She was just like you and everybody thought she was a big weirdo. There! You

look much better! Peter, if anybody stuck you in a pot of boiling water I'd kill them,
do you know that? ... What do they call boiling the skin off a cat? I call it murder,
that's what I call it. They say it was hit by a car and Janice just scooped it up and
before you could say bingo it was screaming in a pot of boiling water. .. Do you know
what they're all waiting to see? Marna's feathers! That's what Miss Hanley said. She
said Marna blabs as though she was the Queen of England and just as proper as can
be, and that her idea of getting dressed up is to put on all the feathers in the world and
go as a bird. Always trying to get somewhere, like a great big bird.
TILLIE: Don't tell Marna, please. It doesn't matter.
RUTH: I was up there watching her getting dressed and sure enough, she's got the
feathers out.
TILLIE: You didn't tell her what Miss Hanley said?
RUTH: Are you kidding? I just told her I didn't like the feathers and I didn't think she
should wear any. But I'll bet she doesn't listen to me.
TILLIE: It doesn't matter.
RUTH: It doesn't matter? Do you think I want to be laughed right out of the school
tonight, with Chris Burns there, and all? Laughed right out of the school, with your
electric hair and her feathers on that stage, and Miss Hanley splitting her sides?
TILLIE: Promise me you won't say anything.
RUTH: On one condition.
TILLIE: What?
RUTH: Give Peter to me.
TILLIE: The taxi will be here any minute and I won't have all this stuff ready. Did you
see my speech?
RUTH: I mean it. Give Peter to me.
TILLIE: He belongs to all of us.
RUTH: For me. All for me. What do you care? He doesn't mean anything to you
anymore, now that you've got all those crazy plants.
TILLIE: Will you stop?
RUTH: If you don't give him to me I'm going to tell Marna that everybody's waiting to
laugh at her.
TILLIE: Where are those typewritten cards?
RUTH: I MEAN IT! Give him to me!
TILLIE: Does he mean that much to you?
RUTH: Yes!
TILLIE: All right.
RUTH: Betty the Loon ... That's what they used to call her, you know. Betty the Loon!
[Then the bunny bites you.+ m)*+
TILLIE: I don't think that's very nice.
RUTH: First they had Betty the Loon, and now they've got Tillie the Loon ... You don't
have to worry about me turning you in for any old plants ... How much does a taxi cost
from here to the school?
TILLIE: Not much.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

RUTH: I wish she'd give me the money it costs for a taxi - and for all that cardboard and
paint and flowerpots and stuff. The only time she ever made a fuss over me was when
she drove me nuts.
TILLIE: Tell her to hurry, please.
RUTH: By the way, I went over to see Janice Vickery's pot, that she did you know what
in, and I started telling her and her mother about the worms in Mr. Alexander
Brougham's legs, and I got thrown out because it was too near dinner time. That Mrs.
Vickery kills me. She can't stand worms in somebody else's legs but she lets her
daughter cook a eat.
TILLIE: Mother! The taxi will be here any minute.
BEA TRICE: You're lucky I'm corning, without all this rushing me.
TILLIE: Marna, you look beautiful.
BEATRICE: Don't put it on too thick. I said I'd go and I guess there's no way to get out
of it. Do you mind telling me how I'm supposed to get up on the stage? Do they call
my name or what? And where are you going to be? If you ask me, they should've sent
all the parents a mimeographed sheet of instructions. If this is supposed to be such a
great event, why don't they do it right?
TILLIE: You just sit on the stage with the other parents before it begins.
BEATRICE: How long is this going to last? And remember, I don't care even if you do
win the whole damn thing, I'm not making any speech. I can hold my own anywhere,
but I hated that school when I went there and I hate it now ... and the only thing I'd
have to say is, what a pack of stupid teachers and vicious children they have. Imagine
someone tearing the skin off a cat.
RUTH: She didn't tear it. She boiled it off.
BEATRICE: You just told me upstairs that girl tore the skin off with an orange knife
and ... do you know, sometimes you exasperate me? If you've got all the plants in this
box, I can manage the folding thing. Do you know I've got a headache from doing
those titles? And you probably don't even like them.
TILLIE: I like them very much.
BEATRICE: Look, if you don't want me to go tonight, I don't have to. You're about as
enthusiastic as a dummy about this whole thing.
TILLIE: I'm sorry.
BEA TRICE: And I refuse to let you get nervous. Put that bow back in your hair.
RUTH: I took it out.
BEATRICE: What did you do that for 7
RUTH: Because it made her look crazy.
BEATRICE: How would you know what's crazy or not? If that sweater of yours was
any tighter it'd cut off the circulation in your chest. The bow looks very nice in your
hair. There's nothing wrong with looking proper, Matilda, and if you don't have
enough money to look expensive and perfect, people like you for trying to look nice.
You know, one day maybe you will be pretty. You'll have some nice features, when
that hair revives and you do some tricks with makeup. I hope you didn't crowd the
plants too close together. Did you find your speech?
TILLIE: Yes, mother.
BEATRICE: You know, Matilda, I was wondering about something. Do you think
you're really going to win? I mean, not that you won't be the best, but there's so

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Antln·opology

much politics in school. Don't laugh, but if there's anyone who's an expert on that,
it's me, and someday I'm going to write a book and blast that school to pieces. If
yon're just a little bit different in this world, they try to kill you off.
RUTH: Tillie gave Peter to me.
BEA TRICE: Oh 9 Then you inherited the rabbit droppings I found upstairs. What are
you doing with your coat on?
RUTH: I'm going out to wait for the taxi.
BEATRICE: Oh, no you're not. You start right in on the rabbit droppings. Or you won't
get another cigarette even if you scratch my back with an orange knife.
RUTH: I'm going down to the school with you.
BEATRICE: Oh, no you're not! You're going to keep company with that corpse in
there. If she wakes up and starts gagging just slip her a shot of whiskey. Quick! Grab
the plants, Matilda - I' 11 get the big thing.
RUTH: I want to go! I promised Chris Burns I'd meet him.
BEATRICE: Can't you understand English?
RUTH: I've got to go!
BEATRICE: Shut up!
RUTH: I don't care! I'M GOING ANYWAY!
BEATRICE: WHAT DID YOU SAY?
TILLIE: Mother!
BEATRICE: Hurry up with that box, Matilda, and tell him to stop blowing the horn.
HURRY UP 1 I don't know where you ever got the idea you were going tonight. Did
you think nobody was going to hold down the fort? ... Now you know how I felt all
those years you and everybody else was running out whenever they felt like it because there was always me to watch over the fifty-dollar-a-week corpse. If there's
one thing I demand it's respect. I don't ask for anything from you but respect.
RUTH: Why are you ashamed ofme?
BEATRICE: I've been seen with a lot worse than you. I don't even know why I'm going
tonight, do you know that? Do you think I give one goddanm about the whole
thing? ... Do you want to know why I'm going? Do you really want to !mow why this
once somebody else has to stick with that dried prune for a few minutes? Because this
is the first time in my life I've ever felt just a little bit proud over something. Isn't that
silly? Somewhere in the back of this turtle-sized brain of mine I feel just a little
proud! Jesus Christ! And you begrudge me even that, you little bastard.
RUTH: Hurry up. They're waiting for you ... They're all waiting for you.
BEATRICE: I hope the paint is dry ... Who's waiting for me?
RUTH: Everybody ... including Miss Hanley. She's been telling all the teachers ... about
you ... and they're all waiting.
BEATRICE: You're such a little liar, Ruth, do you know that? When you can't have
what you want, you try to ruin it for everybody else.
RUTH: Goodnight, Betty the Loon.
BEA TRICE: Take this thing.
RUTH: What for?
BEATRICE: Go with Matilda.
RUTH: I don't want to go now.
BEATRICE: GET OUT OF HERE!

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

RUTH: Now Tillie's going to blame it on me that you're not going - and take the rabbit
back. I can't help it what people call you. I'll tell Tillie you '11 be down later, all
right? ... Don't answer me. What do I care!
II.ii
JANICE: The Past: I got the cat from the A.S.P.C.A. immediately after it had been
killed by a high-altitude pressure system. That explains why some of the rib bones are
missing, because that method sucks the air out of the animal's lungs and rnptures all
cavities. They say it prevents crnelty to animals but I think it's horrible. Then I boiled
the cat in a sodium hydroxide solution until most of the skin pulled right off, but I had
to scrape some of the grizzle off the joints with a knife. You have no idea how
difficult it is to get right down to the bones. I have to go on to 17,e Present, now - but
I did want to tell you how long it took me to put the thing together. I mean, as it is
now, it's extremely useful for students of anatomy, even with the missing rib bones,
and it can be used to show basic anatomical aspects of many, many animals that are
in the same family as felines. I suppose that's about the only present uses I can think
for it, but it is nice to remember as an accomplishment, and it looks good on college
applications to show you did something else in school besides dating. The Future:
The only future plans I have for Tabby - my little brother asked the A.S.P.C.A. what
its name was when he went to pick it up and they said it was called Tabby, but I think
they were kidding him -I mean as far as future plans, I'm going to donate it to the
science department, of course, and next year, if there's another Science Fair perhaps
I'll do the same thing with a dog. Thank you very much for your attention, and I hope
I win!
II.iii
BEATRICE: I want to talk to the principal, please ... Well, you'll have to get him down
off the stage .. .It's none of your goddamn business who I am! ... Oh, I see ... Yes. I have
a message for him and Mr. Goodman, and you, too ... And this is for Miss Hanley,
too ... Tell them Mrs. Hunsdorfer called to thank them for making her wish she was
dead ... Would you give them that message, please? ... Thank you very much.
BEATRICE: Hello. This is Mrs. Hunsdorfer. . .I'm sony if I frightened you, I wouldn't
want you to think Nanny had deceased or anything like· that - I can imagine how
terrible you'd feel if anything like that ever happened ... Terrible tragedy that would
be, Miss Career Woman of the Year. .. Yes, I'll tell you why I'm calling. I want her
out of here by tomorrow. I told you when you rolled her in here I was going to try her
out for a while and if! didn't like her she was to get the hell out. Well I don't like her,
so get her the hell out ... It's like this. I don't like the way she cheats at solitaire. Is
that a good enough reason? ... Fine. And if she's not out of here by noon I'll send her
collect in an ambulance, you son of a bitch!
[No, don't kill the rabbit. - fl
II.iv
TILLIE: The Past: The seeds were exposed to various degrees ... of gamma rays from
radiation sources in Oak Ridge ... Mr. Goodman helped me pay for the seeds ... Their
growth was plotted against ... time. The Present: The seeds which received little

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

radiation have grown to plants which are normal in appearance. The seeds which
received moderate radiation gave rise to mntations such as double blooms, giant
stems, and variegated leaves. The seeds closest to the gamma source were killed or
yielded dwarf plants. The Future: After radiation is better understood, a day will
come when the power of exploding atoms will change the whole world we know.
Some of the mutations will be good ones - wonderful things beyond our dreams and I believe, I believe this with all my heart, THE DAY WILL COME WHEN
MANKIND WILL THANK GOD FOR THE STRANGE AND BEAUTIFUL
ENERGY FROM THE ATOM.
RUTH: MAMA! MAMA' She won! Mama! Where are you? She won! Hurry up! Hurry!
Oh, my God, I can't believe it' Mama! Come on down 1 Hurry! Give me that! Mama!
Wait till you see this! Mama' She won ... Didn't you hear me? Tillie won the whole
thing! ... Mama? ... What's the matter with you? What did you rip the paper off the
windows for?
TILLIE: Mama? Are you going to open a ... shop?
RUTH: What's the matter? Can't you even answer?
BEATRICE: Hand me some of those tacks.
RUTH: I SAID SHE WON! ARE YOU DEAF?
BEATRICE: Ruth, if you don't shut up I'm going to have you put away.
RUTH: They ought to put you away, BETTY THE LOON!
BEATRICE: The rabbit is in your room. I want you to bury it in the morning.
RUTH: If you did anything .. .I'LLKILL YOU!
TILLIE: Mother, you didn't kill it, did you?
BEATRICE: Nanny goes tomorrow. First thing tomorrow.
TILLIE: Ruth? Are you all right?
BEATRICE: I don't know what it's going to be. Maybe a tea shop. Maybe not. After
school you're going to have regular hours. You'll work in the kitchen, you'll learn
how to cook, and you're going to earn your keep, just like in any other business.
TILLIE: Mama .. .I think she's going to go. Don't go ... don't go ... Help me! Mama! Help
me!
BEATRICE: Snap out of it, do you hear me? RUTH, DON'T LET YOURSELF GO!
Help me get her downstairs!
BEATRICE: Get the wooden spoon!
TILLIE: Shall I call the doctor? ... Shall I call the doctor?
BEATRICE: No. She'll be all right.
TILLIE: I think we should call him.
BEATRICE: I DIDN'T ASK YOU WHAT YOU THOUGHT! ... We're going to need
every penny to get this place open.
TILLIE: I'd better bury him in the backyard.
BEATRICE: Don't bury the towel.
TILLIE: I'll do it in the morning.
BEATRICE: Matilda?
TILLIE: Yes, Mama?
BEATRICE: I hate the world. Do you know that, Matilda?
TILLIE: Yes, Mama.
BEATRICE: I hate the world.

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

TILLIE: The Conclusion: My experiment has shown some of the strange effects
radiation can produce ... and how dangerous it can be if not handled correctly. Mr.
Goodman said I should tell in this conclusion what my future plans are and how this
experiment has helped me make them. For one thing, the effect of gamma rays on
man-in-the-moon marigolds has made me curious about the sun and the stars, for the
universe itself must be like a world of great atoms - and I want to know more about
it. But most important, I suppose, my experiment has made me feel important - every
atom in me, in everybody, has come from the sun - from places beyond our dreams.
The atoms of our hands, the atoms of our hearts ... Atom. Atom. What a beautiful
word.

THE END

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

APPENDIXG
AUDIENCE TRANSCRIPT
Nov. 3, 2006 Friday 10 pm
KEY:
[response] : spectator's response
m : male spectator
f : female spectator
f=l : no response, or negative response from the audience to the comment
[±] : positive response from audience to comment, typically laughter
* : suggestion was taken up by performer or tech
- : no reaction, or negative reaction, to the enacted suggestion by the audience
+ : positive reaction, typically laughter, to the enacted suggestion by the audience
# : spectator suggested something moments before it was scheduled to happen
EXAMPLE:
[Act. + m)*- : A male spectator shouted out, "Act." The audience responded to this
suggestion with laughter. Subsequently, an actor accepted the suggestion and enacted
it. This time, however, the audience did not react, or reacted negatively, to the actor's
enactment.

Li
[Lights up. -f)*TILLIE'S VOICE: He told me to look at my hand, for a part of it came from a star that

exploded too long ago to imagine. This part of me was formed from a tongue of fire
that screamed through the heavens until there was our sun. And this part of me - this
tiny part of me - was on the sun when it itself exploded and whirled in a great stonn
until the planets came to be. And this small part of me was then a whisper of the
earth. When there was life, perhaps this part of me got lost in a fern that was crushed
and covered until it was coal. And then it was a diamond millions of years later - it
must have been a diamond as beautiful as the star from which it had first come. Or
perhaps this part of me became lost in a terrible beast, or became part of a huge bird
that flew above the primeval swamps. And he said this thing was so small - this part
of me was so small it couldn't be seen - but it was there from the beginning of the
world. And he called this bit of me an atom. And when he wrote the word, I fell in
love with it. Atom. Atom. What a beautiful word.
I.ii
BEATRICE: Will you gel that please? No help! Never any help! Hello? Yes it is. Who
is this? .. .I hope there hasn't been any trouble at school. .. Oh, she's always been like
that. She hardly says a word around here, either. I always say some people were born
to speak and others born to listen ... You know I've been meaning to call you to thank

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

you for that lovely rabbit you gave Matilda. She and I just adore it and it's gotten so
big ... Well, it certainly was thoughtful. Mr. Goodman, I don't mean to change the
subject but aren't you that delightful young man Tillie said hello to a couple of
months back at the A & P? You were by the lobster tank and I was near the frozen
foods? That delightful and handsome young man') ___ Why, I would very much indeed
use the expression handsome. Yes, and ... Well, I encourage her at every opportunity
at home. Did she say I didn't? Both my daughters have their own desks and I put 75watt bulbs right near them ... Yes ... Yes ... I think those tests are very much overrated,
anyway, Mr. Goodman ... [Hang up. - m[ Well, believe me she's nothing like that
around th.is house ... Now I don't want you to think I don't appreciate what you're
trying to do, Mr. Goodman, [Stop smoking. - fl [It's bad for yon. - m[ bnt I'm
afraid it's simply useless. I've tried jnst everything, bnt she isn't a pretty girl - I
mean, let's be frank abont it - she's going to have her problems. Are you married,
Mr. Goodman? Oh, that's too bad. I don't know what's the matter with women today
letting a handsome young man like you get away ... Well, some days she just doesn't
feel like going to school. You just said how bright she is, and I'm really afraid to put
too much of a strain on her after what happened to her sister. You know, too much
strain is the worst thing in this modern world, Mr. Goodman, and I can't afford to
have another convulsive on my hands, now can I? But don't you worry about Matilda.
There will be some place for her in this world. And, like I said, some were born to
speak and others just to listen ... and do call again, Mr. Goodman. It's been a true
pleasure speaking with you. Goodbye.
BEATRICE: Matilda, that wasn't very nice of you to tell them I was forcibly detaining
you from school. Why, the way that Mr. Goodman spoke, he must think I'm running
a concentration camp. Do you have any idea how embarrassing it is to be accused of
running a concentration camp for your own children? Well, it isn't embarrassing at
all. That school of yours is forty years behind the times anyway, and believe me you
learn more around here than that ugly Mr. Goodman can teach you! You know, I
really feel sorry for him. I never saw a man with a more effeminate face in my life.
When I saw you talking to him by the lobster tanlc I said to myself, "Good Lord, for a
science teacher my poor girl has got herself a Hebrew hermaphrodite." Of course,
he's not as bad as Miss Hanley. The idea of letting her teach girl's gym is staggering.
And you have to place me in the embarrassing position of giving them a reason to call
me at eight-thirty in the morning, no less.
TILLIE: I didn't say anything.
BEATRICE: What do you tell them when they want to know why you stay home once
in a while?
TILLIE: I tell them I'm sick.
BEATRICE: Oh, you're sick all right, the exact nature of the illness not fully realized,
but you're sick all right. Any daughter that would turn her mother in as administrator
of a concentration camp has got be suffering from something very peculiar.
TILLIE: Can I go in today, Mother?
BEATRICE: You'll go in, all right.
TILLIE: Mr. Goodman said he was going to do an experiment BEATRICE: Why, he looks like the kind that would do his experimenting after
sundown.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

TILLIE: On radioactivity BEATRICE: On radioactivity? That's all that high school needs!
TILLIE: He's going to bring in the cloud chamberBEATRICE: Why, what an outstanding event. If you had warned me yesterday I
would've gotten all dressed to kill and gone with you today. I love seeing cloud
chambers being brought in.
TILLIE: You can actually see BEATRICE: You're giving me a headache.
TILLIE: Please?
BEATRICE: No, my dear, the fortress of knowledge is not going to be blessed with your
presence today. I have a good number of exciting duties for you to take care of, not
the least of which is rabbit droppings.
TILLIE: Oh, Mother, please .. .I' 11 do it after school.
BEATRICE: If we wait a minute longer this house is going to ferment. I found rabbit
droppings in my bedroom even.
TILLIE: I could do it after Mr. Goodman's class. I'll say I'm ill and ask for a sick pass.
BEATRICE: Do you want me to chloroform that thing right this minute?
[Matilda, be more aggressive about it. - m) [Let her go to school. - m) [She needs
an education.+ m) [Do it.+ m)
TILLIE: No!
BEATRICE: Then shut up.
RUTH: Do you have Devil's Kiss down there?
BEATRICE: It's in the bathroom cabinet.
RUTH: There's so muchjnnk in here it's driving me crazy.
BEATRICE: Maybe it's in my purse .. .If you don't hurry np you'll be late for school.
RUTH: Well, I couldn't very well go in without Devil's Kiss, now could I?
BEATRICE: Doesn't anyone go to school these days without that all over their lips?
RUTH: Nobody I !mow, except Tillie, that is. And if she had a little lipstick on I'll bet
they wouldn't have laughed at her so much yesterday.
BEATRICE: Why were they laughing?
RUTH: The assembly. Didn't she tell you about the assembly?
BEATRICE: Ruth, you didn't tell me she was in an assembly.
RUTH: Well, I just thought of it right now. How could I tell you anything until I think of
it - did you ever stop to consider that? Some crummy science assembly.
BEATRICE: What is she talking about?
RUTH: I thought she'd tell the whole world. Imagine, right in front of the assembly, with
everybody laughing at her.
BEATRICE: Will you be quiet, Ruth? Why were they laughing at you?
TILLIE: I don't know.
RUTH: You don't know? My heavens, she was a sight. She had that old jumper on - the
faded one with that low collar - and a raggy slip that showed all over and her hair
looked like she was struck by lightning.
BEATRICE: You're exaggerating ...
RUTH: [Re-enact the laughter. - m] She was cranking this model of something TILLIE: The atom.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

RUTH: This model of the atom ... you know, it had this crank and a long tower so that
when you turned it, these little colored balls went spinning around like crazy. And
there was Tillie, cranking away, looking weird as a coot. .. that old jumper with the
raggy slip and the lightning hair. .. cranking away while some boy with glasses was
reading this sh1pid speech ... and eve1ybody burst into laughter until the teachers
yelled at them. And all day long, the kids kept corning up to me saying, "ls that really
your sister? How can you bear it?" And you know, Chris Burns says to me - "She
looks like the one that went to the looney doctors." I could have kissed him there and
then.
[IN -fl
BEATRICE: Matilda, if you can't get yourself dressed properly before going to school,
you're never going to go again. I don't like the idea of everybody laughing at you,
because when they laugh at you they're laughing at me. And I don't want you
cranking any more ... [Matilda, laugh at her. - ml atoms.
RUTH: You're almost out of Devil's Kiss.
BEATRICE: If you didn't put so much on it would last longer.
RUTH: Who was that calling?
BEATRICE: Matilda turned me in to the Gestapo.
[Give Matilda a cigarette. - fl
RUTH: Can I earn a cigarette this morning?
BEATRICE: Why not?
[Have some beer, too.+ m]*+ [Drink it. -fl [Scratch her eyes out.+ ml
RUTH: Was it Mr. Goodman?
BEATRICE: Who?
RUTH: The call this morning. Was it Mr. Goodman?
BEATRICE: Yes.
RUTH: I figured it would be.
BEA TRICE: A little higher, please.
RUTH: There?
BEATRICE: Yes, there ...Why did you figure it would be Mr. Goodman?
RUTH: Well, he called me out of sewing class yesterday - I remember because my
blouse wasn't all buttoned - and he wanted to know why Tillie's out of school so
much.
BEATRICE: Lower. A little lower. .. And what did you tell him?
RUTH: I wish you'd go back to Koo ls. I liked Koo ls better.
TILLIE: What did you tell him?
RUTH: I told him you were ill, and he wanted to know what kind, so I told him you had
leprosy.
TILLIE: You didn't!
RUTH: You should have seen his face. He was so cute. And I told him you had
ringworm and gangrene.
BEATRICE: What did he say?
RUTH: And I told him you had what Mother's last patient had ... whatchamacallit?
BEATRICE: Psoriasis?
RUTH: Yeah. Something like that.
TILLIE: Tell me you didn't, Ruth!

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

RUTH: OK. I didn't. .. But I really did.
BEATRICE: He knew you were joking.
RUTH: And then I told him to go look up the history and then he'd find out. Whenever
they go look up the history then they don't bother me anymore 'cause they think I'm
crazy.
BEATRICE: RuthRUTH: And I told him the disease you had was fatal and that there wasn't much hope for
you.
BEA TRICE: What kind of history is it?
RUTH: Just a little folder with the story of our lives in it, that's all.
BEATRICE: How did you ever see it?
RUTH: I read the whole thing last term when Miss Hanley dragged me into the record
room becanse I didn't want to climb the ropes in gym and I told her my skull was
growmg.
BEATRICE: A little lower, please.
RUTH: Lower! Higher! I wish you'd make up your mind. If you'd switch back to Kools
it might be worth it, but ugh' these are awful. (More top-light. - m]*- You know, I
really did think my skull was growing. Either that or a tumor. So she dragged me out
of gym class, and she thought I couldn't read upside down while she was sitting
opposite me with the history. But I could.
BEATRICE: What does it say?
RUTH: Oh, it says you're divorced and that I went crazy ... and my father took a heart
attack at Star Lake ... and now you're a widow BEATRICE: That's it! Hold it right there! Aaah!
RUTH: And it says that I exaggerate and tell stories and that I'm afraid of death and
have nightmares ... and all that stuff.
BEATRICE: And what else does it say9
RUTH: I can't remember everything you know. Remember this, remember that ...
remember this, that. ..
(Stop scratching. - fj
I.iii
TILLIE'S VOICE: Today I saw it. Behind the glass a white cloud began to form. He
placed a small piece of metal in the center of the chamber and we waited until I saw
the first one - a trace of smoke that came from nowhere and then disappeared. And
then another. .. and another, until I knew it was coming from the metal. They looked
like water-sprays from a park fountain, and they went on and on for as long as I
watched. [Spotlight on the rabbit. - m] And he told me the fountain of smoke would
come forth for a long time, and if I had wanted to, I could have stayed there all my
life and it would never have ended - that f0tmtain, so close I could have touched it. In
front of my eyes, one part of the world was becoming another. Atoms exploding,
flinging off tiny bullets that caused the fountain, atom after atom breaking down into
something new. And no one could stop the fountain. It would go on for millions of
years - on and on, this fountain from eternity.
I.iv

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE: 1 thought we had everything, but leave it to you to think of the one thing
we're missing ... (Matilda, get a beer. - mj Twenty-two acres in Prince's Bay. Small
pond. $6,000 ... That's cheap. I'd take a look at it ifI had any money ... (Turn to page
three. - m]*- [Do sudoku. + m] What kind of seeds are they?
TILLIE: Marigolds. They've been exposed to cobalt-60.
BEATRICE: If there's one thing I've always wanted, it's been a living room planted
with marigolds that have been exposed to cobalt-60. While you're at it, why don't
you throw in a tomato patch in the bathroom?
TILLIE: Just let me keep them here for a week or so until they get started and then I' II
transplant them to the backyard.
BEATRICE: Four-family house. Six and a half and six and a half over five and five.
Eight garages. I could really do something with that. A nursing home ... Don't think
I'm not kicking myself that I didn't finish that real estate course. 1 should have
finished beauty school, too ... God, what I could do with eight garages ... You !mow,
I'm thinking of getting rid of that and making this place into something.
TILLIE: Yes.
BEATRICE: I've been thinking about a tea shop. Have you noticed there aren't many of
them around anymore?
TILLIE: Yes.
BEA TRICE: And this is just the type of neighborhood where a good tea shop could
make a go of it. We'd have a good cheesecake. You've got to have a good
cheesecake ... (Can everyone talk in a Russian accent.+ ml Eight times ten - well,
eight times eight, if they're falling down - that's sixty-four dollars a month from the
garages alone .. .I swear money makes money.
[Give her entrance music. - m[
BEATRICE: What is cobalt-60?
TILLIE: It's something that causes ... changes in seeds. Oh, Mother - he set the cloud
chamber up just for me and he told me about radioactivity and half-life and he got the
seeds for me.
BEATRICE: What does half-life mean?
TILLIE: The half~life of Polonium-210 is one hundred and forty days. The half-life of
Radium-226 is one thousand five hundred and ninety years. The half~life ofUranium23 8 is four and one-half billion years.
BEATRICE: Do you know you're giving me a headache? [What about plutonium'/+
mj LOOK WHO'S THERE! IT'S NANNY! NANNY CAME [Fall down.+ ml ALL
THE WAY OUT HERE BY HERSELF! I'm going to need a cigarette for this.
NANNY! YOU COME SIT DOWN [Hit her with the walker.+ fJ AND WE'LL BE
RIGHT WITH HER! You know, sometimes I've got to laugh. I've got this on my
hands and all you're worried about is planting marigolds. [Give Nanny a cigarette.+
ml I'VE GOT HOTSY WATER FOR YOU, NANNY. WOULD YOU LIKE SOME
HOTSY WATER AND HONEY? I've never seen it to fail. Every time I decide to
have a cup of coffee I see that face at the curtains. I wonder what she'd do ... (Nanny,
be fifty years younger. -.ml if I just poured this right over her head. [Do it. - m]*I'll be she wouldn't even notice it. NANNY'S GOING TO GET JUST WHAT SHE
NEEDS! [Spill some tea. - ml [Pour the water on her. - fl You know if someone
told me when I was young that I'd end up feeding honey to a zombie, I'd tell them

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

they were crazy. !Beatrice, stop smoking. - m] SOMETHING WRONG, NANNY?
OH, DID I FORGET NANNY'S SPOON? MERCY! MERCY! I FORGOT
NANNY'S SPOON! I'll give you a spoon, Nanny, I'll give you a spoon. [Matilda,
rnn away from home. - m] [Nanny, throw the water in her face. - f) Matilda!
Watch me give Nanny her spoon. A SPOON FOR NANNY! Fifty dollars a week.
Fifty dollars. I look at you, Nanny, and I wonder if it's worth it. !Matilda, play with
your rabbit. - m]*- [Have more respect for old people. Come on.+ m] I think I'd
be better off driving a cab. TAKE HONEY, NANNY. HONEY WITH HOTSY
WATER! You should have seen her daughter bring her here last week .. .I could have
nsed you that day ... She came in pretending she was Miss Career Woman of the Year.
She said she was in real estate and such a busy little woman, [Beatrice, help Nanny
with her sugar pack. - m] such a busy little woman - she just couldn't give all the
love and care and affection her little momsy needed anymore ... Nanny's quite a little
cross to bear, now aren't you, Nanny dear? But you're a little better than Mr. Mayo
was - with the tumor on his brain - or Miss Marion Minto with her cancer, or Mr.
Brougham ... what was his first name?
TILLIE: Alexander.
BEATRICE: Mr. Alexander Brougham with the worms in his legs. WHY, NANNY'S
QUITE SOME LITTLE GIRL, AREN'T YOU, NANNY? A GIRL DRINKING HER
HOTSY AND HONEY! ... !She still needs a lemon. - ml !Matilda, start cleaning
the house. -f) Cobalt-60. Ha! You take me for a fool, don't you?
TILLIE: No, Mother.
BEATRICE: Science, science, science! Don't they teach our misfits anything anymore?
Anything decent and meaningfol and sensitive? [Spot on Beatrice. - m]*+ Do you
know what I'd be now if it wasn't for this mud pool I got sucked into? I'd probably
be a dancer. [Tillie, give Nanny a kiss. -fl Miss Betty Frank, The Best Dancer of the
Class of 19 ... !Open the iris.+ m] something. !Dance.+ f]*+ One minute I'm the
best dancer in school - smart as a whip - the head of the whole crowd! [Modern
dance. - fl And the next minute ... One mistake. That's how it starts. !Slam the door.
- f) Marry the wrong man and before you know it he's got you tied down with two
stones around your neck for the rest of your life. !Matilda, go sit with Nanny. - f)*When I was in that lousy high school I was one of the most respected kids you ever
saw. I used to wonder why people always said, "Why, just yesterday ... !{cuts himself
off)]why, just yesterday ... !Beatrice, shut up.+ ml why, just yesterday ... " [Ruth,
come on in. + mj Before I knew what happened I lost my dancing legs and got
varicose legs. Beautifol varicose legs. IPlay some dancing music. - fl Do you know,
everything I ever thought I'd be has exploded! NANNY, YOU HURRY UP WITH
THAT HONEY! Exploded! [Beatrice, tear down some newspaper. - m) You know,
I almost forgot about everything I was supposed to be ... NANNY'S ALMOST
FINISHED. ISN'T THAT WONDERFUL? She's almost finished, all right.
NANNY'S DAUGHTER IS COMING TO SEE YOU SOON. WILL THAT MAKE
NANNY HAPPY? The day Miss Career Woman of the Year comes to visit again I
think I'll drop dead. Nobody's too busy for anything they want to do, don't you tell
me. !The beer tastes like shit. - m]*+ What kind of idiot !Put some beer in
Nanny's tea. + fl do people take me for 9 NANNY, YOU'RE SPILLING YOUR
HOTSY! JESUS CHRIST' You know, I ought to kick you right out and open that tea

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

shop tomorrow. (Give her some beer instead. - m) Oh, it's coming. I can feel it.
And the first thing I'll do is get rid of that rabbit.
[Nanny, move to the couch. -f)
TILLIE: Yes, Mother.
BEATRICE: Yon think I'm kidding?
TILLIE: No, I don't.
BEATRICE: You bet I'm not! ["Kill the wabbit." + m] I was going to do this a month
ago. [Matilda, age twenty years. - m] Here it is. Here·s a new word for you.
Trichloro ... methane. Do you know what that is, Matilda? Well, it's chloroform! I'm
saving it for that Angora mannre machine of yonrs. (IN + m[ Speaking of mannre
machines, IS NANNY READY TO GO MAKE DUTY? NANNY IS ALWAYS
READY FOR DUTY, (Nanny, make duty right there. + ml AREN'T YOU
NANNY? BECAUSE NANNY'S A GOODY-GOODY GIRL AND GOODYGOODY GIRLS ALWAYS GET GOODY-GOODY THINGS. GOD LOOKS OUT
FOR GOODY-GOODY GIRLS AND GIVES THEM HOTSY AND HONEY RIGHT, NANNY?
BEATRICE: Half-life! If you want to !mow what a half-life is, just ask me. You're
looking at the original half-life! I got stuck with one daughter with half a mind;
another one who's half a test tube; half a husband - a house half full of rabbit crap and half a corpse! That's what I call a half-life, Matilda! (Matilda, fight back. - mj
Me and cobalt-60! Two of the biggest half-lifes you ever saw! [Shout back at her. -

m]
[A bit louder, please. - m)*Macarena ?" + m]

[Something more upbeat. + f)

[Do you have "The

I.v
BEATRICE: Hello - Mr. Goodman, please ... How would I know if he's got a class? ...
(More cool light. - m] Hello, Mr. Goodman? Are you Mr. Goodman" .. .Oh, I beg
yonr pardon, Miss Torgersen ... Yes, I'll wait. .. [Blackout for thirty seconds.+ m)
Couldn't you find him, Miss Torgersen? ... [Insult her. - f) Oh! Excuse me, Mr.
Goodman. How are you? .. .I'll bet you'll never guess who this is - it's Mrs.
Hunsdorfer - remember the frozen foods? You !mow, Ruth told me she's your new
secretary and I certainly think that's a delight. You were paying so much attention to
Matilda that I'll bet Ruth just got jealous. She does things like that, you !mow. I hope
she works hard for you, although I can't imagine what kind of work Ruth could be
doing in that great big science office. She's a terrible snoop ... Yonr attendance? Isn't
that charming. And the cut cards! Imagine. You trust her with ... why, I didn't know
she could type at all .. .imagine. Well .. .I'll ... Of course, too much work isn't good for
anyone, either. No wonder she's failing everything. I mean, 1 never knew a girl who
failed everything regardless of what they were suffering from ... [Hang up. - f[ I
suppose I should say recovering from ... Well, it's about the seeds you gave
Matilda ... Well, she's had them in the house for a week now and they're starting to
grow. Now, she told me they had been subjected to radioactivity, and I hear such
terrible things about radioactivity that I automatically associate radioactivity with
sterility, and it positively horrifies me to have those seeds right here in my living
room. (Switch ears. - mj Couldn't she just grow plain marigolds like everyone else?

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Oh ... It does sound like an interesting project, but. .. No, I must admit that at this very
moment I don't know what a mutation is ... Mr. Goodman ... Mr. Goodman! I don't
want you to think I'm not interested, but please spare me definitions over the phone.
I' 11 go the library next week and pick me out some little book on science and then I'll
!mow all about mutations ... [No you won't.+ ml No, you didn't insult me, but I just
want you to know that I'm not stupid ... [Yes you are. - ml I just thought prevention
was better than a tragedy, Mr. Goodman. I mean, Matilda has enough problems to
worry about without sterility ... Well, I was just concerned, but you've put my poor
mother's heart at ease. You know, really, our schools need more exciting young men
like you, 1 really mean that. Really. Oh, I do. Goodbye, Mr. Goodman.
[Lights up during the scene change. - m]

I.vi
[More lightning. - m]
TILLIE: Mother! She's going to have one!
BEATRICE: Stop it 1 Stop it, Ruth!
TILLIE: She's going!
BEATRICE: Ruth! Stop it!
TILLIE: She's going to go!
BEATRICE: Shut up and get back in your room! You're not going to let yourself go, do
you hear me, Ruth? You're not going to go!
RUTH: He's after me!
BEATRICE: You were dreaming, do you hear me? Nobody's after you! Nobody!
TILLIE: 1 saw her eyes start to go backBEATRICE: Get back in your room! There, now, nobody's after you. Nice and easy.
Breathe deeply ... Did the big bad man come after my little girl? [Ruth, grab the
blanket. - m] That big bad bogey man? Now that wasn't so bad, was it?
RUTH: It was the dream, with Mr. Mayo again.
BEATRICE: Oh. [Project more. - fJ*- Well, we'll just get you a little hot milk and Why, the electricity's gone off. Do you remember what happened to those candles?
RUTH: What candles 9
BEATRICE: The little white ones from my birthday cake last year.
RUTH: Tillie melted them down for school a long time ago.
BEATRICE: She had no right to do that.
RUTH: She asked you. She used them to attach a paper straw to a milk bottle with a
balloon over it, and it was supposed to tell if it was going to rain.
BEATRICE: There! It works. I don't want her wasting anything of mine unless she's
positive I won't need it. You always need candles. Why, Ruth - your skin just turned
ice cold! This will warm you up ... What's the matter0
[Point it away from the audience. - ml
RUTH: The flashlight BEATRICE: What's wrong with it?
RUTH: It's the same one I used to cheek on Mr. Mayo with.
BEATRICE: So it is. We don't need it.
RUTH: No, let me keep it. [Switch roles. - m] Do you want to know how they have it in
the history"

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE: No, I don't.
RUTH: Well, they say I came out of my room ... And I started down the stairs, step by
step ... and I heard the choking and banging on the bed, and ...
BEATRICE: I'm going back to bed.
RUTH:No!
BEATRICE: Well, talk about something nice, then.
RUTH: Oh, Mama, tell me about the wagon.
BEATRICE: You change so fast I can't keep up with you.
RUTH: Mama, please ... the story about the wagon.
BEATRICE: I don't know anything about telling stories. Get those great big smart
teachers of yours to do that sort of stuff.
(Make the lights come on. - f(*RUTH: Tell me about the horses again, and how you stole the wagon.
BEATRICE: Don't get me started on that.
RUTH: Mama,please ...
BEA TRICE: Do you want a cigarette?
(No. - f( (You're out of cigarettes ... after this one. + m]*+ (The lighter doesn't
work. - m]*+ [Blackout.+ m] [Ruth get - (cuts himself off). - m] [Ruth, have
an attack. - m] [Have the board ops switch boards. + m] [Bring Rafael on
stage; he'll solve it.+ m] [The battery goes out in the flashlight. - m] [Explain
who Mr. Mayo is. - f(
RUTH: Leave out the part where they shoot the horses, though.
BEATRICE: Honey, you know the whole story RUTH: "Apples! Pears! Cu .. .cumbers!"
BEATRICE: No. It's "Apples! Pears! Cucum ... bers!"
BEATRICE AND RUTH: "Apples! Pears! Cucum . .. bers!"
RUTH: How did you get the wagon out without him seeing you?
BEATRICE: That was easy. Every time he got home for the day he'd make us both
some sandwiches - my mama had been dead for years - and he'd take a nap on the
old sofa that used to be ... there! And while he was sleeping I got the horses hitched up
and went riding around the block waving to everyone.
RUTH: Oh, Mama, you didn't'
BEATRICE: Of course I did. I had more nerve than a bear when I Was a kid. Let me tell
you it takes nerve to sit up on that wagon every day yelling "Apples! ... Pears!
Cucwn ... bers !"
RUTH: Did he find out you took the wagon?
BEATRICE: Did he find out? He came running down the street after me and started
spanking me right on top of the wagon - not hard - but it was so embarrassing - and I
had one of those permy marshmallow ships in the back pocket of my overalls, and it
got all squished. And you better believe I never did it again... (Make shadow
puppets on the back wall. - m]*+ You would have loved him, Ruth, and gone out
with him on the wagon ... all over Stapleton yelling as loud as you wanted.
RUTH: "Apples! Pears! Cu .. .cumbers!"
BEATRICE: No 1
RUTH: "Cucum .. .bers!"
(Pears. -m(

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE: My father made up for all the other men in this whole world, Ruth. If only
you two could have met. He'd only be about seventy now, do you realize that? And
I'll bet he'd still be selling vegetables around town. All that fun - and then I don't
think I ever knew what really hit me.
RUTH: Don't tell about BEATRICE: Don't worry about the horses.
RUTH: What hit you?
BEATRICE: Well it was just me and Papa ... and your father hanging around. And then
Papa got sick ... and I drove with him up to the sanatorium. And then I came home
and there were the horses RUTH: Mother!
BEATRICE: And I had the horses ... taken care of. And then Papa got terribly sick and
he begged me to marry so that he'd be sure I'd be taken care of. If he knew how I was
taken care of he'd tum over in his grave. And nightmares! Do you want to know the
nightmare I used to have? I never had nightmares over the fights with your father, or
the divorce, or this thrombosis - he deserved it - I never had nightmares over any of
that. Let me tell you about my nightmare that used to come back and back: Well, I'm
on Papa's wagon, but it's newer and shinier, and it's being pulled by beautiful white
horses, not dirty workhorses - these are like circus horses with long manes and tinsel
- and the wagon is blue, shiny blue. And it's full - filled with yellow apples and
grapes and green squash. You're going to laugh when you hear this. I'm wearing a
lovely gown with jewels all over it, and my hair is piled up on top of my head with a
long feather in it, and the bells are ringing. Huge bells swinging on a gold braid
strung across the back of the wagon, and they're going DONG, DONG ... DONG,
DONG. And I'm yelling "APPLES! PEARS! CUCUM ... BERS!"
RUTH: That doesn't sound like a nightmare to me.
[Can yon play "Staving Alive?" In the background? - rn]
BEATRICE: And then I tum down our street and all the noise stops. This long street,
with all the doors of the houses shut and everything crowded next to each other, and
there's not a soul around. And then I start getting afraid that the vegetables are going
to spoil...and that nobody's going to buy anything, and 1 feel as though I shouldn't be
on the wagon, and I keep trying to call out. But there isn't a sound. [More thunder. fl [Is it still raining?=- rn] [Make it rain. - fl*- Not a single sound. [Lights. - fJ
[Spot on Beatrice. - t] Then 1 tum my head and look at the house across the street. I
see an upstairs window, and a pair of hands pull the curtains slowly apart. [Dance.+
fl I see the face of my father and my heart stands still. .. Ruth ... take the light out of
my eyes.
[Shine it in her eyes again.+ m] [IN - m] [Lightning. - rn]
RUTH: Is Nanny going to die here?
[Be more experimental.+ m]
BEATRICE: No.
RUTH: How can you be sure?
BEATRICE: I can tell.
RUTH: Are you crying?
[Blow vour nose. - rn] [Matilda, come out. - fl
BEATRICE: What's left for me, Ruth?

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

RUTH: What, Mama?
BEATRICE: What's left for me 9
[Lights on dnring the scene change. - fj JIN - ml [IN - m] [Skip the next light
cue.+ ml [Crew sit on the couch during the next scene.+ f) [IN - ml
I.vii
[Nanny, take a swig. - f) [Chase it down with a Miller Light. + ml )Tillie, feed
your plants beer.+ f) [Discover that one of them has died. - ml*- [Go feed the
dead ones to the rabbit. + fl [Laird, call the show from the stairs. + ml [Laird,
call the show in Spanish. + m] [IN - f) [Somebody make the easy chair point
the other way. - ml
TILLIE: What are you doing?
BEATRICE: A little housecleaning, and you're going to help. You can start by getting
rid of that rabbit or I'll suffocate the bastard. You don't think I will, do you? You
wait and see. Where's Ruth? She's probably tunning around the schoolyard in her
brassiere.
TILLIE: Mother, they want me to do something at school.
BEATRICE: NANNY! DID YOU HEAR THAT? [Nanny, dance.+ f) THEY WANT
HER TO DO SOMETHING AT SCHOOL! ISN'T THAT MOMENTOUS,
NANNY? Well I want you to do something around here. Like get rid of that bunny.
I'm being generous! I'll let you give it away. Far away. Give it to Mr. Goodman. I'd
chloroform [Beatrice, be more passive-aggressive. - ml the thing myself, but that
crazy sister of yours would throw convulsions for fifty years ... and I hate a house that
vibrates. And get rid of those sterile marigolds. They stink! [IN - ml HI, NANNY HOW ARE YOU, HONEY? [Punch Beatrice in the face, Nanny. + ml HOW
WOULD YOU LIKE TO GO ON A LONG TRIP? You see, everybody, I spent today
taking stock of my life and I've come up with zero. I added up all the separate
departments and the total reads zero ... zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero
zero zero zero zero zero [Spotlight on Beatrice. - ml zero zero zero zero ... And do
you know how you pronounce that, with all your grammatical schoolin' and foolin'?
You pronotmce it o,o,o,o,O,O,O,O,O,O,! [Say one in ten. + ml
o,o,o,o,O,O,O,O,O,O,O,O! Right, Nanny? RIGHT, NANNY? So, )Tillie's an
orphan, adopted by Nanny. -fl by the end of the week, you get rid of that cottontail
compost heap and we'll get you a job down at the five-and-ten-cent store. And if you
don't do so well with the public, we'll fix you up with some kind of machine.
Wouldn't that be nice?
RUTH: Can you believe it? I didn't, until Chris Burns came up and told me about it in
Geography, and then Mr. Goodman told me himself during the eighth period in the
office [Put your jacket back on. - fl when I was eavesdropping. Aren't you so
happy you could bust? Tillie? I'm so proud I can't believe it, Marna. Everybody was
talking about it and nobody ... well, it was the first time they all came up screaming
about her and I said, "Yes, she's [Nanny, wake up. - fl my sister'" I said it, "She's
my sister! My sister' )IN - fl My sister!" )Someone take care of Nannv. - ml Give
me a cigarette.
BEATRICE: Get your hands off my personal property.
RUTH: I'll scratch your back later.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE: I don't want you to touch me'
RUTH: Did he call yet? My God, I can't believe it, I just can't'
BEATRICE: Did who call yet?
RUTH: I'm not supposed to tell you, as Mr. Goodman's private secretary, but you're
going to get a call from school.
BEATRICE: What is she talking about?
TILLIE: I was in the Science Fair at school.
RUTH: Didn't she tell you yet? Oh, Tillie, how could you? She's fantastic, Mama! She's
a finalist in the Science Fair. There were only five of them out of hundreds and
hundreds. She won with all those plants over there. They're freaks' Isn't that a
scream? Dr. Berg picked her himself. The principal! And I heard Mr. Goodman say
she was going to be another Madam Pasteur and (Fall off the couch. - m) he never
saw a girl do anything like that before and ... so I told everybody, "Yes, she's my
sister!" Tillie, "You're my sister!" I said. And Mr. Goodman called the Advance and
they're coming to take your picture. Oh, Mama, isn't it crazy? And nobody laughed at
her, Mama. She beat out practically everybody and nobody laughed at her. "She's my
sister," I said. "She's my sister!" [Tillie's adopted. - fJ That must be him! [Can
Nanny drool some more? + m) Mama, answer it - I'm afraid. Answer it before he
hangs up! [Matilda, answer it. - m) Mama! [Matilda, get it. - m) He's gonna hang
up! (Answer it. -fl Hello? ... Yes ... It's him! ... Just a minute, please ... He wants to talk
to you.
(Talk to him. - fJ [See if the phone stretches to the top of the stairs. + m)
BEATRICE: Who?
RUTH: The principal!
(Tillie, try not to be nice. - m)
BEA TRICE: Hang up.
[Take the call. - fl
RUTH: I told him you were here! [Don't hang up. - fl Mama!
[Throw the phone at her. - fl (Throw the phone at Nanny. + fl (Someone take
care of Nanny. - m)
BEATRICE: Yes? .. .! know who you are, Dr. Berg ... [Nanny, die.+ m) I see ... Couldn't
you get someone else? There's an awfol lot of work that has to be done around here,
because she's not as careful with her home duties as she is with man-in-the-moon
marigolds ... Me? What would you want with me up on the stage? ... The other mothers
can do as they please .. .I would have thought you had enough in your history
without .. .I'll think about it. .. Goodbye, Dr. Berg ... I SAID I'D THINK ABOUT ]Tl
RUTH: What did he say?
BEATRICE: How could you do this to me? HOW COULD YOU LET THAT MAN
CALL OUR HOME! I have no clothes, do you hear me? I'd look just like you up on
the stage, ugly little you! DO YOU WANT THEM TO LAUGH AT US? LAUGH
ATTHETWOOFUS?
RUTH: Mother. .. [Beatrice, take out your anger on an audience member.+ mj aren't
you proud of her? Mother. . .it's an honor.
(Ruth, give Tillie a hng. - fj *TILLIE: But. .. nobody laughed at me.
[Nanny, give Ruth a hug.+ m)

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE: Oh, my God ...
(Make the helicopter land in the theater.+ ml (Lights on during the scene change.
- fl [Spot on stage crew. They're people, too, vou know.+ m] (IN - fl (Sheira,
suggest something. - mj [Yay crew. - mj

II.i
[Do act one again. - m( [Start the show from the beginning. - ml [Whoa. - m(
[Start from the beginning. - fl [Do it twice as fast. - m( [I forgot my sheet. ml [All right, man. - ml [Forward in time. - t] [Yon should apologize. - m]
(Sorry. - m] [Do act two backwards. - fl [Speak in Swahili. - ml (Ouch. - fl
(What's the hypothesis? - m] [Are we the control?+ m]
RUTH: The only competition you have to worry about is Janice Vickery. They say she
caught it near Princess Bay Boulevard and it was still alive when she took the skin off
it.
TILLIE: Let me do that please, Ruth.
RUTH: I'm sorry I touched them, really.
TILLIE: Why don't you feed Peter?
RUTH: Because I don't feel like feeding him ... Now I feel like feeding him. I heard that
it screamed for three minutes after she put it in becanse the water wasn't boiling yet.
How much talent does it take to boil the skin off a cat and then stick the bones
together again? That's what I want to know. Ugh. I had a dream abont that, too. I
figure she did it in less than a day and she ends up as one of the top five
winners ... and you spend months growing atomic flowers.
(The rabbit bites you. - m]
TILLIE: Don't you think you should finish getting ready?
RUTH: Finish? This is it!
TILLIE: Are you going to wear that sweater?
RUTH: Look, don't worry about me. I'm not getting up on any stage, and if I did I
wouldn't be caught dead with a horrible bow like that.
TILLIE: [Change the sweater. - m] Mother put itRUTH: They're going to laugh you off the stage again like when you cranked that atom
in assembly ... ! didn't mean that ... The one they're going to laugh·at is Mama.
TILLIE: What?
RUTH: I said the one they're going to laugh at is Mama ... Oh, let me take that bow off.
TILLIE: It's all right.
RUTH: Look, just sit still. I don't want everybody making fun of you.
TILLIE: What made you say that about Mama?
RUTH: Oh, I heard them talking in the Science Office yesterday. Mr. Goodman and
Miss Hanley. She's getting $12.63 to chaperon the thing tonight.
TILLIE: What were they saying?
RUTH: Miss Hanley was telling Mr. Goodman about Mama ... when she found out you
were one of the five winners. And he wanted to know if there was something wrong
with Mama because she sounded crazy over the phone. And Miss Hanley said she
was crazy and she always has been crazy and she can't wait to see what she looks like
after all these years. Miss Hanley said her nickname used to be Betty the Loon.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

TILLIE: Rutb, you're hurting me.
RUTH: She was just like you and everybody thought she was a big weirdo. There' You
look much better! Peter, [The rabbit's dead. - m] if anybody stuck you in a pot of
boiling water I'd kill tbem, do you know that? ... [Put the bow back in. - f] What do
they can boiling the skin off a cat? [Drop the rabbit. - m] I can it murder, that's
what I call it. They say it was hit by a car and Janice just scooped it up and before you
could say bingo it was screaming in a pot of boiling water. .. Do you !mow what
they're alJ waiting to see? Mama's feathers! That's what Miss Hanley said. She said
Mama blabs as though she was the Queen of England and just as proper as can be,
and tbat her idea of getting dressed up is to put on all the feathers in the world and go
as a bird. Always trying to get somewhere, like a great big bird.
TILLIE: Don't tell Mama, please. It doesn't matter.
RUTH: I was up there watching her getting dressed and sure enough, she's got the
feathers out.
TILLIE: You didn't tell her what Miss Hanley said?
RUTH: Are you kidding? I just told her I didn't like the feathers and I didn't think she
should wear any. But I'll bet she doesn't listen to me.
TILLIE: It doesn't matter.
RUTH: It doesn't matter? Do you think I want to be laughed right out of the school
tonight, with Chris Burns there, and all? Laughed right out of the school, with your
electric hair and her feathers on that stage, and Miss Hanley splitting her sides?
TILLIE: Promise me you won't say anything.
RUTH: On one condition.
TILLIE: What?
RUTH: Give Peter to me.
TILLIE: The taxi will be here m1y minute and I won't have all this stuff ready. Did you
see my speech?
RUTH: I mean it. Give Peter to me.
TILLIE: He belongs to all ofus.
RUTH: For me. All for me. What do you care? He doesn't mean anything to you
anymore, now that you've got all those crazy plants.
TILLIE: Will you stop?
RUTH: If you don't give him to me I'm going to tell Mama that everybody's waiting to
laugh at her.
TILLIE: Where are those typewritten cards?
RUTH: I MEAN IT! Give him to me!
TILLIE: Does he mean that much to you?
RUTH: Yes!
TILLIE: All right.
RUTH: Betty the Loon ... That's what they used to call her, you know. Betty the Loon!
TILLIE: I don't thinl, that's very nice.
RUTH: First they had Betty the Loon, and now they've got Tillie the Loon ... You don't
have to worry about me turning you in for any old plants ... How much does a taxi cost
from here to the school?
TILLIE: Not much.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

RUTH: I wish she'd give me the money it costs for a taxi - and for all that cardboard and
paint and flowerpots and stnff. The only time she ever made a fuss over me was when
she drove me nuts.
TILLIE: Tell her to hurry, please.
RUTH: By the way, I went over to see Janice Vickery's pot, that she did you know what
in, and I started telling her and her mother about the worms in Mr. Alexander
Brougham's legs, and I got thrown out because it was too near dinner time. That Mrs.
Vickery kills me. She can't stand worms in somebody else's legs but she lets her
daughter cook a cat.
[Tillie, be more irritated. - m]
TILLIE: Mother! The taxi will be here any minute.
BEA TRICE: You're lucky I'm corning, without all this rushing me.
TILLIE: Marna, you look beautiful.
BEA TRICE: Don't put it on too thick. I said I'd go and I guess there's no way to get out
of it. Do you mind telling me how I'm supposed to get up on the stage? Do they call
my name or what? And where are you going to be? If you ask me, they should've sent
all the parents a mimeographed sheet of instructions. If this is supposed to be such a
great event, why don't they do it right?
TILLIE: You just sit on the stage with the other parents before it begins.
BEATRICE: How long is this going to last? And remember, 1 don't care even if you do
win the whole damn thing, I'm not making any speech. I can hold my own anywhere,
but I hated that school when I went there and I hate it now ... and the only thing I'd
have to say is, what a pack of stnpid teachers and vicious children they have. Imagine
someone tearing the skin off a cat.
RUTH: She didn't tear it. She boiled it off.
BEATRICE: You just told me upstairs that girl tore the skin off with an orange knife
and ... do you know, sometimes you exasperate me? [Ruth, fight back. - m] If you've
got all the plants in this box, I can manage the folding thing. Do you know I've got a
headache from doing those titles? And you probably don't even like them.
TILLIE: I like them very much.
BEATRICE: Look, if you don't want me to go tonight, I don't have to. You're about as
enthusiastic as a dummy about this whole thing.
TILLIE: I'm sorry.
[Ruth, tell your mother what the teachers said. - fl
BEATRICE: And I refuse to let you get nervous. Put that bow back in your hair.
RUTH: 1 took it out.
BEATRICE: What did you do that for?
RUTH: Because it made her look crazy.
BEATRICE: How would you know what's crazy or not? If that sweater of yours was
any tighter it'd cut off the circulation in your chest. [Suddenly, it's very hot in the
room. + m] The bow looks very nice in your hair. There's nothing wrong with
looking proper, Matilda, and if you don't have enough money to look expensive and
perfect, people like you for trying to look nice. You know, one day maybe you will be
pretty. You'll have some nice features, when that hair revives and you do some tricks
with makeup. I hope you didn't crowd the plants too close together. Did you find
your speech?

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

TILLIE: Yes, mother.
[Matilda, take out the bow. - m)
BEATRICE: You know, Matilda, I was [Do it. - f) wondering about something. Do you
think you're really going to win? [Take out the bow. - f)*- I mean, not that you
won't be the best, but there's so much politics in school. Don't laugh, but if there's
anyone who's an expert on that, it's me, and someday I'm going to write a book and
blast that school to pieces. If you're just a little bit different in this world, they try to
kill you off.
)Leave it ont. - f) [Ruth, tell her about Betty the Loon and the feathers. - m)
RUTH: Tillie gave Peter to me.
BEATRICE: Oh? Then you inherited the rabbit droppings I found upstairs. What are
you doing with your coat on?
RUTH: I'm going out to wait for the taxi.
BEATRICE: Oh, no you're not. You start right in on the rabbit droppings. Or you won't
get another cigarette even if you scratch my back with an orange knife.
RUTH: I'm going down to the school with you.
BEATRICE: Oh, no you're not! You're going to keep company with that corpse in
there. If she wakes up and starts gagging just slip her a shot of whiskey. Quick! Grab
the plants, Matilda - I'll get the big thing.
RUTH: I want to go' I promised Chris Burns I'd meet him.
BEATRICE: Can't you understand English?
RUTH: I've got to go!
BEATRICE: Shut up!
RUTH: I don't [Let her go. - f] care! I'M GOING ANYWAY!
BEATRICE: WHAT DID YOU SAY?
TILLIE: Mother!
[Let her go. - f]
BEATRICE: Hurry up with that box, Matilda, and tell him to stop blowing the horn.
HURRY UP! I don't know where you ever got the idea you were going tonight. Did
you think nobody was going to hold down the fort? ... Now you know how I felt all
those years you and everybody else was running out whenever they felt like it because there was always me to watch over the fifty-dollar-a-week corpse. If there's
one thing I demand it's respect. I don't ask for anything from you but respect.
RUTH: Why are you ashamed ofme?
BEATRICE: I've been seen with a lot worse than you. I don't even know why I'm going
tonight, do you know that? Do you think I give one goddamn about the whole
thing?... Do you want to know why I'm going? Do you really want to know why this
once somebody else has to stick with that dried prune for a few minutes? Because this
is the first time in my life I've ever felt just a little bit proud over something. Isn't that
silly? Somewhere in the back of this turtle-sized brain of mine I feel just a little
proud! Jesus Christ' And you begrudge me even that, you little bastard.
[Beatrice, leave without the poster and then come back for it. - m)*RUTH: Hurry up. They're waiting for you ... They're all waiting for you.
BEATRICE: I hope the paint is dry ... Who's waiting for me?
RUTH: Everybody ... including Miss Hanley. [Don't tell her. - f) She's been telling all
the teachers ... about you ... and they're all waiting.

Robe1i Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE: You're such a little liar, Ruth, do you know that? When you can't have
what you want, you try to ruin it for everybody else.
RUTH: Goodnight, Betty the Loon.
BEATRICE: Take this thing.
RUTH: What for 7
BEATRICE: Go with Matilda.
RUTH: l don't want to go now.
BEATRICE: GET OUT OF HERE!
RUTH: Now Tillie's going to blame it on me that you're not going - and take the rabbit
back. I can't help it what people call you. I'll tell Tillie you'll be down later, all
right? ... Don't answer me. What do I care!
[Nannv, come on stage. - m](met with disapproval) [More top-light. - ml
fN ew scene change music. - fl*II.ii
JANICE: The Past: I got the cat from the A.S.P.C.A. immediately after it had been
killed by a high-altitude pressure system. That explains why some of the rib bones are
missing, because that method sucks the air out of the animal's lungs and ruptures all
cavities. They say it prevents cruelty to animals but I think it's horrible. Then l boiled
the cat in a sodium hydroxide solution until most of the skin pulled right oft; but l had
to scrape some of the grizzle off the joints with a knife. You have no idea how
difficult it is [Act smarter. - ml to get right down to the bones. l have to go on to
The Present, now - but l did want to tell you how long it took me to put the thing
together. I mean, as it is now, it's extremely useful for students of anatomy, even with
the missing rib bones, [Sav "like" more often. - ml and it can be used to show basic
anatomical aspects of many, many animals that are in the same family as felines.
[You have a cold. You can't stop sneezing. - ml I suppose that's about the only
present uses I can think for it, but it is nice to remember as an accomplishment,
[Blink less. - ml and it looks good on college applications to show you did
something else in school besides dating. The Future: The only future plans I have for
Tabby - my little brother asked the A.S.P.C.A. what its name was when he went to
pick it up and they said it was called Tabby, but I think they were kidding him -I
mean as far as future plans, I'm going to donate it to the science department, of
course, and next year, if there's another Science Fair perhaps I'll do the same thing
with a dog. Thank you very much for your attention, and I hope l win! [You got into
Penn.+ m] [Ow. - fl
II.iii
BEATRICE: I want to talk to the principal, please ... Well, you'll have to get him down
off the stage ... It's none of your goddamn business who I am! ... Oh, I see ... Yes. I have
a message for him and Mr. Goodman, and you, too ... And this is for Miss Hanley,
too ... Tell them Mrs. Hunsdorfer called to thank them for making her wish she was
dead ... Would you give them that message, please? ... Thank you very much.
[Throw the phone against the wall. - fl [Down the alcohol. - ml [Don't answer it.
- ml [Don't answer it. - ml [Don't. Hang it up.+ ml*+

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE: Hello. This is Mrs. Hunsdorfer. .. I'm sorry if I frightened you, I wouldn't
want you to think Nanny had deceased or anything like that - I can imagine how
terrible you'd feel if anything like that ever happened ... Terrible tragedy that would
be, Miss Career Woman of the Year. .. Yes, I'll tell you why I'm calling. I want her
out of here by tomorrow. I told you when you rolled her in here I was going to try her
out for a while and if I didn't like her she was to get the hell out. Well I don't like her,
so get her the hell out ... [Start liking her.+ m) It's like this. I don't like the way she
cheats at solitaire. Is that a good enough reason? ... Fine. And if she's not out of here
by noon I'll send her collect in an ambulance, you son of a bitch!
[Down the alcohol. - m] [Call her back and give her a better reason. - m) [Start
cleaning up. + fl [Put a red spotlight on her. - m)*+ [Don't rip it. - f) [Dim
the lights. - m]*- )Don't kill the rabbit. - fl [There you go. + m) [Throw the
rabbit off the stairs. - mj
[Change the music to the rain. -fl*+ [Thunder. - mj*- [Lightning. -fl*II.iv
TILLIE: [Spot. - mj*- The Past: The seeds were exposed to various degrees ... of
gamma rays from radiation sources in Oak Ridge .. .Mr. Goodman helped me pay for
the seeds ... Their growth was plotted against... time. [Move into the light. - m)
[Tillie, give a perfect presentation. + mj The Present: The seeds which received
little radiation have grown to plants which are normal in appearance. [Take off your
bow. - fl The seeds which received moderate radiation gave rise to mutations such as
double blooms, giant stems, and variegated leaves. [Lower your voice. - m]*- The
seeds closest to the gamma source were killed or yielded dwarf plants. [You know
your notes. - ml The Future: [Tell us the standard deviation.+ mj After radiation
is better understood, a day will come when the power of exploding atoms will change
the whole world we know. Some of the mutations will be good ones - wonderful
things beyond our dreams - and I believe, I believe this with all my heart, THE DAY
WILL COME WHEN MANKIND WILL THANK GOD FOR THE STRANGE
AND BEAUTIFUL ENERGY FROM THE ATOM.
[No music. - !] [Stop using this music for the rest of the show. + mj [Oh. - m)
[Play Mirah again. - fl [Let Jess Pfeffer run the board. + m j
II.v
RUTH: MAMA! MAMA! She won! Marna! Where are you? She won! Hurry up! Hurry!
Oh, my God, I can't believe it! Marna! Corne on down! Hurry! Give me that! Mama!
Wait till you see this! Mama! She won ... Didn't you hear me? Tillie won the whole
thing! ... [Recvcle the can.+ fl Mama? ... What's the matter with you? [Throw the
rabbit on the couch. - m) (Collapse. + m) What did you rip the paper off the
windows for?
[Act silently using your body. - fl
TILLIE: Marna 9 Are you going to open a ... shop?
RUTH: What's the matter9 Can't you even answer?
BEATRICE: Hand me some of those tacks.
RUTH: I SAID SHE WON! ARE YOU DEAF?
BEATRICE: Ruth, if you don't shut up I'm going to have you put away.

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

RUTH: They ought to put you away, BETTY THE LOON!
[Ruth, look for the rabbit. - fJ
BEA TRICE: The rabbit is in your room. I want you to bury it in the morning.
RUTH: If you did anything .. .I'LL KILL YOU!
[The rabbit's alive.+ ml [The rabbit had babies.+ fl
TILLIE: Mother, you didn't kill it, did you 0
BEATRICE: Nanny goes tomorrow. First thing tomorrow.
TILLIE: Ruth? Are you all right?
BEATRICE: I don't know what it's going to be. Maybe a tea shop. Maybe not. After
school you're going to have regular hours. You'll work in the kitchen, you'll learn
how to cook, and you're going to earn your keep, just like in any other business.
TILLIE: Mama .. .I think she's going to go. Don't go ... don't go ... Help me! Mama! Help
me!
BEATRICE: Snap out of it, do you hear me? RUTH, DON'T LET YOURSELF GO!
Help me get her downstairs!
BEATRICE: Get the wooden spoon!
TILLIE: Shall I call the doctor? ... Shall I call the doctor?
BEATRICE: No. She'll be all right.
TILLIE: I think we should call him.
BEATRICE: [IN - ml I DIDN'T ASK YOU WHAT YOU THOUGHT! ... [Matilda,
call the doctor. - ml*+ We're going to need every pem1y to get this place open.
[Let her call. - fl [Pick up the phone and call again. - fl [IN - fl [Ruth, have
another, more violent attack.+ ml [Tillie, take the spoon out of her mouth. - fl
TILLIE: I'd better bury him in the backyard.
BEATRICE: Don't bury the towel.
[The rabbit bites you. - ml
TILLIE: I'll do it in the morning.
[Bring it back to life with gamma rays. + mJ [Tell Michelle about Peter's death. ml [Michelle? + ml
BEATRICE: Matilda?
TILLIE: Yes, Mama?
BEATRICE: I hate the world. Do you know that, Matilda?
TILLIE: Yes, Mama.
BEATRICE: I hate the world.
TILLIE: The Conclusion: My experiment has shown some of the strange effects
radiation can produce ... and how dangerous it can be if not handled correctly. Mr.
Goodman said I should tell in this conclusion what my foture plans are and how this
experiment has helped me make them. For one thing, the effect of gamma rays on
man-in-the-moon marigolds has made me curious about the sun and the stars, for the
universe itself must be like a world of great atoms - and I want to know more about
it. [Cross downstage. - fl But most important, I suppose, my experiment has made
me feel important - every atom in me, in everybody, has come from the sun - from
places beyond our dreams. The atoms of our hands, the atoms of our hearts ... Atom.
Atom. What a beautifol word.

THE END

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Antlnopology

APPENDIXG
AUDIENCE TRANSCRIPT
Nov. 4, 2006 Saturday 8 pm
KEY:
[response] : spectator's response
m : male spectator
f : female spectator
f=l : no response, or negative response from the audience to the comment
[±1 : positive response from audience to comment, typically laughter
* : suggestion was taken up by performer or tech
- : no reaction, or negative reaction, to the enacted suggestion by the audience
+ : positive reaction, typically laughter, to the enacted suggestion by the audience
# : spectator suggested something moments before it was scheduled to happen
EXAMPLE:
[Act. + m)*- :. A male spectator shouted out, "Act." The audience responded to this
suggestion with laughter. Subsequently, an actor accepted the suggestion and enacted
it. This time, however, the audience did not react, or reacted negatively, to the actor's
enactment.

l.i
TILLIE'S VOICE: He told me to look at my hand, for a part ofit came from a star that
exploded too long ago to imagine. This part of me was formed from a tongue of fire
that screamed tlnough the heavens until there was our sun. And this part of me - this
tiny part of me - was on the sun when it itself exploded and whirled in a great storm
until the planets came to be. And this small part of me was then a whisper of the
earth. When there was life, perhaps this part of me got lost in a fem that was crushed
and covered until it was coal. And then it was a diamond millions of years later - it
must have been a diamond as beautiful as the star from which it had first come. Or
perhaps this part of me became lost in a terrible beast, or became part of a huge bird
that flew above the primeval swamps. And he said this thing was so small - this part
of me was so small it couldn't be seen - but it was there from the beginning of the
world. And he called this bit of me an atom. And when he wrote the word, I fell in
love with it. Atom. Atom. What a beautiful word.

I.ii
BEATRICE: Will you get that please? No help! Never any help! Hello? Yes it is. Who
is this? .. .! hope there hasn't been any trouble at school...Oh, she's always been like
that. She hardly says a word around here, either. [Hang up on him. - m) I always say
some people were born to speak and others born to listen ... You know I've been
meaning to call you to thank you for that lovely rabbit you gave Matilda. She and I

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

just adore it and it's gotten so big ... [More green light. - ml* Well, it certainly was
thoughtful. Mr. Goodman, I don't mean to change the subject but aren't you that
delightful young man Tillie said hello to a couple of months back at the A & P? You
were by the lobster tank and I was near the frozen foods? That delightful and
handsome young man? ... Why, I would very much indeed use the expression
handsome. Yes, and ... Well, I encourage her at every opportunity at home. Did she
say I didn't? Both my daughters have their own desks and I put 75-watt bulbs right
near them ... Yes ... Yes ... l think those tests are very much overrated, anyway, Mr.
Goodman ... Well, believe me she's nothing like that around this house ... Now I don't
want you to think I don't appreciate what yon're trying to do, Mr. Goodman, [Put the
spotlight on the young girl. - ml but I'm afraid it's simply useless. I've tried just
everything, but she isn't a pretty girl - I mean, let's be frank about it - she's going to
have her problems. Are you married, Mr. Goodman? Oh, that's too bad. I don't know
what's the matter with women today letting a handsome young man like you get
away ... [Quit smoking. It's bad for you.+ ml Well, some days she just doesn't feel
like going to school. You just said how bright she is, and I'm really afraid to put too
much of a strain on her after what happened to her sister. You know, too much strain
is the worst thing in this modern world, Mr. Goodman, and I can't afford to have
another convulsive on my hands, now can I? But don't you worry about Matilda.
There will be some place for her in this world. And, like I said, some were born to
speak and others just to listen ... and do call again, Mr. Goodman. It's been a true
pleasure speaking with you. Goodbye.
BEATRICE: Matilda, that wasn't very nice of you to tell them I was forcibly detaining
you from school. Why, the way that Mr. Goodman spoke, he must think I'm running
a concentration camp. Do you have any idea how embarrassing it is to be accused of
running a concentration camp for your own children? Well, it isn't embarrassing at
all. That school of yours is forty years behind the times anyway, and believe me you
learn more around here than that ugly Mr. Goodman can teach you! You know, I
really feel sorry for him. I never saw a man with a more effeminate face in my life.
[Spotlight on Tillie. - ml*- When I saw you talking to him by the lobster tank I said
to myself, "Good Lord, [Drink the beer. + ml for a science teacher my poor girl has
got herself a Hebrew hermaphrodite." Of course, he's not as bad as Miss Hanley. The
idea of letting her teach girl's gym is staggering. And you have to place me in the
embarrassing position of giving them a reason to call me at eight-thirty in the
morning, no less.
TILLIE: I didn't say anything.
BEATRICE: What do you tell them when they want lo know why you stay home once
in a while?
TILLIE: I tell them I'm sick.
BEATRICE: Oh, you're sick all right, the exact nature of the illness not fully realized,
but you're sick all right. Any daughter that would turn her mother in as administrator
of a concentration camp has got be suffering from something very peculiar.
TILLIE: Can I go in today, Mother?
BEATRICE: You'll go in, all right.
TILLIE: Mr. Goodman said he was going to do an experiment -

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE: Why, he looks like the kind that would do his experimenting after
sundown.
TILLIE: On radioactivity BEATRICE: On radioactivity? That's all that high school needs!
TILLIE: He's going to bring in the cloud chamberBEATRICE: Why, what an outstanding event. If you had warned me yesterday I
would've gotten all dressed to kill and gone with you today. I love seeing cloud
chambers being brought in.
TILLIE: You can actually see BEATRICE: You're giving me a headache.
TILLIE: Please?
[Rip the newspaper in half. - ml
BEATRICE: No, my dear, the fortress of knowledge is not going to be blessed with your
presence today. I have a good number of exciting duties for you to take care of, not
the least of which is rabbit droppings.
TILLIE: Oh, Mother, please .. .I'll do it after school.
BEATRICE: If we wait a minute longer this house is going to ferment. I found rabbit
droppings in my bedroom even.
TILLIE: I could do it after Mr. Goodman's class. I'll say I'm ill and ask for a sick pass.
BEATRICE: Do you want me to chloroform that thing right this minute?
TILLIE: No!
BEATRICE: Then shut up.
RUTH: Do you [Give her entrance music. - ml have Devil's Kiss down there?
BEATRICE: It's in the bathroom cabinet.
RUTH: There's so much junk in here it's driving me crazy.
BEATRICE: Maybe it's in my purse .. .Ifyou don't hurry up you'll be late for school.
RUTH: Well, I couldn't very well go in without Devil's Kiss, now could I?
BEATRICE: Doesn't anyone go to school these days without that all over their lips?
RUTH: Nobody I know, except Tillie, that is. And if she had a little lipstick on I'll bet
they wouldn't have laughed at her so much yesterday.
BEATRICE: Why were they laughing?
RUTH: The assembly. Didn't she tell you about the assembly?
BEATRICE: Ruth, you didn't tell me she was in an assembly.
RUTH: Well, I just thought of it right now. How could I tell you anything until I think of
it - did you ever stop to consider that? Some crummy science assembly.
BEA TRICE: What is she talking about 0
RUTH: I thought she'd tell the whole world. Imagine, right in front of the assembly, with
everybody laughing at her.
BEATRICE: Will you be quiet, Ruth? Why were they laughing at you?
[Ruth, sneak a drink of the beer. - m [
TILLIE: I don't know.
RUTH: You don't know? My heavens, she was a sight. She had that old jumper on - the
faded one with that low collar - and a raggy slip that showed all over and her hair
looked like she was struck by lightning.
BEATRICE: You're exaggerating ...
RUTH: She was cranking this model of something -

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

TILLIE: The atom.
RUTH: This model of the atom ... you know, it had this crank and a long tower so that
when you turned it, these little colored balls went spirming around like crazy. And
there was Tillie, cranking away, looking weird as a coot. .. that old jumper with the
raggy slip and the lightning hair. .. cranking away while some boy with glasses was
reading this stupid speech ... and everybody burst into laughter until the teachers
yelled at them. And all day long, the kids kept coming up to me saying, "Is that really
your sister? How can you bear it?" And you !mow, Chris Bums says to me - "She
looks like the one that went to the looney doctors." I could have kissed him there and
then.
BEATRICE: Matilda, if you can't get yourself dressed properly before going to school,
you're never going to go again. I don't like the idea of everybody laughing at you,
because when they laugh at you they're laughing at me. And I don't want you
cranking any more ... atoms.
RUTH: You're almost out of Devil's Kiss.
BEATRICE: If you didn't put so much on it would last longer.
RUTH: Who was that calling?
BEATRICE: Matilda turned me in to the Gestapo.
RUTH: Can I earn a cigarette this morning?
BEATRICE: Why not?
RUTH: Was it Mr. Goodman?
BEATRICE: Who?
RUTH: The call this morning. Was it Mr. Goodman?
BEATRICE: Yes.
RUTH: I figured it would be.
BEATRICE: A little higher, please.
RUTH: There?
BEATRICE: Yes, there .. .Why did you figure it would be Mr. Goodman?
RUTH: Well, he called me out of sewing class yesterday - I remember because my
blouse wasn't all buttoned - and he wanted to know why Tillie's out of school so
much.
BEATRICE: Lower. A little lower. .. And what did you tell him?
RUTH: I wish you'd go back to Koo ls. I liked Koo ls better.
TILLIE: What did you tell him 7
RUTH: 1 told him you were ill, and he wanted to know what kind, so I told him you had
leprosy.
TILLIE: You didn't!
RUTH: You should have seen his face. He was so cute. And I told him you had
ringworm and gangrene.
BEATRICE: What did he say?
RUTH: And I told him you had what Mother's last patient had ... whatchamacallit?
BEATRICE: Psoriasis?
RUTH: Yeah. Something like that.
TILLIE: Tell me you didn't, Ruth!
RUTH: OK. I didn't. .. But I really did.
BEATRICE: He !mew you were joking.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

RUTH: And then I told him to go look up the history and then he'd find out. Whenever
they go look up the history then they don't bother me anymore 'cause they think I'm
crazy.
BEATRICE: RuthRUTH: And I told him the disease you had was fatal and that there wasn't much hope for
you.
BEATRICE: What kind of history is it?
RUTH: Just a little folder with the story of our lives in it, that's all.
BEATRICE: How did you ever see it?
RUTH: I read the whole thing last term when Miss Hanley dragged me into the record
room because I didn't want to climb the ropes in gym and I told her my skull was
growmg.
BEATRICE: A little lower, please.
RUTH: Lower! Higher! I wish you'd make up your mind. (Ruth, hit her with it. - m] If
you'd switch back to Koo ls it might be worth it, but ugh! these are awful. You know,
I really did think my skull was growing. Either that or a tumor. So she dragged me
out of gym class, and she thought I couldn't read upside down while she was sitting
opposite me with the history. But I could.
BEATRICE: What does it say?
RUTH: Oh, it says you're divorced and that I went crazy ... and my father took a heart
attack at Star Lake ... and now you're a widowBEATRICE: That's it! Hold it right there! Aaah!
RUTH: And it says that I exaggerate and tell stories and that I'm afraid of death and
have nightmares ... and all that stuff.
BEATRICE: And what else does it say?
RUTH: I can't remember everything you know. Remember this, remember that. ..
remember this, that ...
I.iii
TILLIE'S VOICE: Today I saw it. Behind the glass a white cloud began to form. He
placed a small piece of metal in the center of the chamber and we waited until I saw
the first one - a trace of smoke that came from nowhere and then disappeared. And
then another. .. and another, until I knew it was coming from the metal. They looked
like water-sprays from a park fountain, and they went on and on for as long as I
watched. And he told me the fountain of smoke would come forth for a long time, and
if I had wanted to, I could have stayed there all my life and it would never have ended
- that fountain, so close I could have touched it. In front of my eyes, one part of the
world was becoming another. Atoms exploding, flinging off tiny bullets that caused
the fountain, atom after atom breaking down into something new. And no one could
stop the fountain. It would go on for millions of years - on and on, this fountain from
eternity.
I.iv
BEATRICE: I thought we had everything, but leave it to you to think of the one thing
we're missing ... Twenty-two acres in Prince's Bay. Small pond. $6,000 ... That's
cheap. I'd take a look at it if! had any money ... What kind of seeds are they?

Robe1i Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

TILLIE: Marigolds. They've been exposed to cobalt-60.
BEATRICE: If there's one thing I've always wanted, it's been a living room planted
with marigolds that have been exposed to cobalt-60. While you're at it, why don't
you throw in a tomato patch in the bathroom?
TILLIE: Just let me keep them here for a week or so until they get started aud then 1'11
transplant them to the backyard.
BEATRICE: Four-family house. Six and a half and six and a half over five and five.
Eight garages. I could really do something with that. A nursing home ... Don't think
I'm not kicking myself that I didn't finish that real estate course. I should have
finished beauty school, too ... [Sing "Beauty School Dropout." - ml God, what I
could do with eight garages ... You know, I'm thinking of getting rid of that and
making this place into something.
TILLIE: Yes.
BEATRICE: I've been thinking about a tea shop. Have you noticed there aren't mauy of
them around anymore?
TILLIE: Yes.
BEA TRICE: And this is just the type of neighborhood where a good tea shop could
make a go of it. We'd have a good cheesecake. You've got to have a good
cheesecake ... Eight times ten - well, eight times eight, if they're falling down- that's
sixty-four dollars a month from the garages alone .. .I swear money makes money.
BEATRICE: What is cobalt-60?
TILLIE: It's something that causes ... changes in seeds. [Give her entrance music. +
m]*+ Oh, Mother - he set the cloud chamber up just for me and he told me about
radioactivity and half-life and he got the seeds for me.
BEATRICE: What does half-life mean?
TILLIE: The half-life of Polonium-210 is one hundred and forty days. The half-life of
Radium-226 is one thousand five hundred and ninety years. [Red spot on the old
woman. - ml The hal±~life ofUranium-238 is four and one-half billion years.
BEATRICE: Do you know you're giving me a headache? [IN - m) LOOK WHO'S
THERE! IT'S NANNY! NANNY CAME ALL THE WAY OUT HERE BY
HERSELF! I'm going to ueed a cigarette for this. NANNY! YOU COME SIT
DOWN AND WE'LL BE RIGHT WITH HER! You know, sometimes I've got to
laugh. I've got this on my hands and all you're worried about is planting marigolds.
[Drink the beer, Nanny.+ m) I'VE GOT HOTSY WATER FOR YOU, NANNY.
WOULD YOU LIKE SOME HOTSY WATER AND HONEY? I've never seen it to
fail. Every time I decide to have a cup of coffee I see that face at the curtains. I
wonder what she'd do ... ifl just poured this right over her head. [Do it.+ m) [Do it
on her. - m)*+ I'll be she wouldn't even notice it. NANNY'S GOING TO GET
JUST WHAT SHE NEEDS! )Spill the drink in your lap. - ml*+ You know if
someone told me when I was young that I'd end up feeding honey to a zombie, I'd
tell them they were crazy. [Throw out all your cigarettes. - f) [Throw the water
on Beatrice. - m] SOMETHING WRONG, NANNY? OH, DID I FORGET
NANNY'S SPOON? MERCY! MERCY! I FORGOT NANNY'S SPOON! I'll give
you a spoon, Nanny, I'll give you a spoon. Matilda! Watch me give Nanny her spoon.
A SPOON FOR NANNY! [Stand up for your Nanny, Tillie. - m[ Fifty dollars a
week. Fifty dollars. I look at you, Nanny, and I wonder if it's worth it. I think I'd be

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

better off driving a cab. TAKE HONEY, NANNY. HONEY WITH HOTSY
WATER! You should have seen her daughter bring her here last week .. .I could have
used you that day ... She came in pretending she was Miss Career Woman of the Year.
She said she was in real estate and such a busy little woman, such a busy little woman
- she just couldn't give all the love and care and affection her little momsy needed
anymore ... Nanny's quite a little cross to bear, now aren't you, Nanny dear? [Squirt
honey on Beatrice. - ml But you're a little better than Mr. Mayo was - with the
tumor on his brain - or Miss Marion Minto with her cancer, or Mr. Brougham ... what
was his first name?
TILLIE: Alexander.
BEATRICE: Mr. Alexander Brougham with the wonns in his legs. [Beatrice, help her
open the honey. - ml WHY, NANNY'S QUITE SOME LITTLE GIRL, AREN'T
YOU, NANNY? A GIRL DRINKING HER HOTSY AND HONEY! ... Cobalt-60.
Ha! You take me for a fool, don't you?
TILLIE: No, Mother.
BEATRICE: Science, science, science! Don't they teach our misfits anything anymore?
Anything decent and meaningful and sensitive? Do you know what I'd be now if it
wasn't for this mud pool I got sucked into? I'd probably be a dancer. Miss Betty
Frank, (Dance. - ml (Dance. - ml The Best Dancer of the Class of 19 ... (chorus of
"Dance."]
[Do a kick-line. - ml
(Sing "Dancing-" (cuts himself off). - ml
something. (Beatrice, fall down the stairs. + ml One minute I'm the best dancer in
school - smart as a whip - the head of the whole crowd! [Spotlight on Beatrice. fl*- And the next minute ... (Pole-dance on the door. - m[ (Tillie, look at Nanny.
::..!!!l One mistake. That's how it starts. Marry the wrong man and before you know it
he's got you tied down with two stones around your neck for the rest of your life.
When I was in that lousy high school I was one of the most respected kids you ever
saw. I used to wonder why people always said, "Why, just yesterday ... why, just
yesterday ... why, just yesterday ... " Before I knew what happened I lost my dancing
legs and got varicose legs. Beautiful varicose legs. Do you know, everything I ever
thought I'd be has exploded! NANNY, YOU HURRY UP WITH THAT HONEY!
Exploded! You know, I almost forgot about everything I was supposed to be ...
[Throw the honey at Beatrice. - mj NANNY'S ALMOST FINISHED. ISN'T
THAT WONDERFUL? She's almost finished, all right. NANNY'S DAUGHTER IS
COMING TO SEE YOU SOON. WILL THAT MAKE NANNY HAPPY? The day
Miss Career Woman of the Year comes to visit again I think I'll drop dead. Nobody's
too busy for anything they want to do, don't you tell me. What kind of idiot do people
take me for? (Beatrice, clean your house. - f[ NANNY, YOU'RE SPILLING
YOUR HOTSY 1 JESUS CHRIST! You know, I ought to kick you right out and open
that tea shop tomorrow. Oh, it's coming. I can feel it. And the first thing I'll do is get
rid of that rabbit.
(Kick the rabbit cage. - ml
TILLIE: Yes, Mother.
BEATRICE: You think I'm kidding?
TILLIE: No, I don't.
BEATRICE: You bet I'm not! I was going to do this a month ago. Here it is. Here's a
new word for you. Trichloro ... methane. Do you know what that is, Matilda? Well,

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

it's chloroform 1 I'm saving it for that Angora manure machine of yours. Speaking of
manure machines, IS NANNY READY TO GO MAKE DUTY? NANNY IS
ALWAYS READY FOR DUTY, AREN'T YOU NANNY? BECAUSE NANNY'S
A GOODY-GOODY GIRL AND GOODY-GOODY GIRLS ALWAYS GET
GOODY-GOODY THINGS. GOD LOOKS OUT FOR GOODY-GOODY GIRLS
AND GIVES THEM HOTSY AND HONEY - RIGHT, NANNY?
BEATRICE: Half~life! If you want to !mow what a half-life is, just ask me. You're
looking at the original half-life! I got stuck with one daughter with half a mind;
another one who's half a test tube; half a husband - a house half full of rabbit crap and half a corpse! That's what I call a half-life, Matilda! Me and cobalt-60! Two of
the biggest half-fifes you ever saw!
I.v
BEATRICE: Hello - Mr. Goodman, please ... How would I know if he's got a
class? ... Hello, Mr. Goodman? Are you Mr. Goodman 9 ... Oh, I beg your pardon, Miss
Torgersen ... Yes, I'll wait. .. Couldn't you find him, Miss Torgersen? ... Oh! Excuse
me, Mr. Goodman. How are you? .. .I'll bet you'll never guess who this is - it's Mrs.
Hunsdorfer - remember the frozen foods 9 You !mow, Ruth told me she's your new
secretary and I certainly think that's a delight. You were paying so much attention to
Matilda that I'll bet Ruth just got jealous. She does things like that, you know. I hope
she works hard for you, although I can't imagine what kind of work Ruth could be
doing in that great big science office. She's a terrible snoop ... Your attendance? Isn't
that charming. And the cut cards! Imagine. You trust her with ... (The light is
broken. - fJ why, I didn't know she could type at all .. .imagine. Well .. .I'll ... Of
course, too much work isn't good for anyone, either. No wonder she's failing
everything. I mean, I never knew a girl who failed everything regardless of what they
were suffering from .. .! suppose I should say recovering from ... Well, it's about the
seeds you gave Matilda ... Well, she's had them in the house for a week now and
they're starting to grow. Now, she told me they had been subjected to radioactivity,
and I hear such terrible things about radioactivity that I automatically associate
radioactivity with sterility, and it positively horrifies me to have those seeds right here
in my living room. Couldn't she just grow plain marigolds like everyone else? Oh ...
It does sound like an interesting project, but ... No, I must admit that at this very
moment I don't know what a mutation is ... Mr. Goodman ... Mr. Goodman! I don't
want you to think I'm not interested, but please spare me definitions over the phone.
I'll go the library next week and pick me out some little book on science and then I'll
know [Hang up on him. - mJ all about mutations ... No, you didn't insult me, but I
just want you to know that I'm not stupid ... (Curse him out. - ml I just thought
prevention was better than a tragedy, Mr. Goodman. 1 mean, Matilda has enough
problems to worry about without sterility ... Well, I was just concerned, but you've
put my poor mother's heart at ease. You know, really, our schools need more exciting
young men like you, I really mean that. JAsk him on a date. - ml Really. Oh, I do.
Goodbye, Mr. Goodman.
I.vi
!More flashes. - m]

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

TILLIE: Mother! She's going to have one!
BEATRICE: Stop it! Stop it, Ruth!
TILLIE: She's going!
BEATRICE: Ruth' Stop it!
TILLIE: She's going to go 1
BEATRICE: Shut up and get back in your room! You're not going to let yourself go, do
you hear me, Ruth? You're not going to go 1
RUTH: He's after me!
BEATRICE: You were dreaming, do you hear me 0 Nobody's after you! Nobody!
TILLIE: I saw her eyes start to go back BEATRICE: Get back in your room! There, now, nobody's after you. Nice and easy.
Breathe deeply ... [More blue light, - m) [Say something. - m) Did the big bad
man come after my little girl? That big bad bogey man? [Tillie, peak out from the
door. - f)*+ [Allow her. - m) [Go down anyway. - m) [Cooler light. - m)
[Tillie, observe from the door. - f] Now that wasn't so bad, was it?
RUTH: It was the dream, with Mr. Mayo again.
BEATRICE: Oh. Well, we'll just get you a little hot milk and -Why, the electricity's
gone off. Do you remember what happened to those candles?
[Tillie, come down and comfort her in the dark - m)*+
RUTH: What candles?
[More flashes. - m)
BEATRICE: The little white ones from my birthday cake last year.
[Everybody scream. + m] [Tillie, sit with them on the couch, - m) [Nanny, wake
up.+ f) [Turn the lights back on. - ml [/to previous comment) Keep them off.
+ m] [Spotlight on Ruth, - m] [More lightning, - ml
RUTH: Tillie melted them down for school a long time ago.
BEATRICE: She had no right to do that.
RUTH: She asked you. She used them to attach a paper straw to a milk bottle with a
balloon over it, and it was supposed to tell if it was going to rain.
BEATRICE: There! It works. I don't want her wasting anything of mine unless she's
positive I won't need it. You always need candles. Why, Ruth-your skin just turned
ice cold! This will warm you up ... [Laird, call all your cues really loud. + ml
What's the matter?
RUTH: The flashlight BEATRICE: What's wrong with it?
RUTH: It's the same one I used to check on Mr. Mayo with.
BEATRICE: So it is. We don't need it.
RUTH: No, let me keep it. [Everyone come downstage. - m) Do you want to know
how [The flashlight breaks. - m) they have it in the history?
BEATRICE: No, I don't.
[Batteries go out. - m[
RUTH: Well, they say I came out of my room ... And I started [Check on Nanuy. + m)
down the stairs, step by step ... [Enter Nanny. + m) and I heard the choking and
banging on the bed, and ...
BEATRICE: I'm going back to bed.
RUTH: No 1

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE: Well, talk about something nice, then.
[Tell scary stories. - t]
RUTH: Oh, Mama, [Smoke a cigarette. - m] [Tillie scream. - m] tell me about the
wagon.
BEATRICE: You change so fast I can't keep up with you.
RUTH: Mama, please ... the story about the wagon.
BEATRICE: I don't know anything about telling stories. [More lightning. - mj Get
those great big smart teachers of yours to do that sort of stuff.
[Sing her a lullaby. - fl [Sing her "West Side Storv." + mJ
RUTH: Tell me about the horses again, and how you stole the wagon.
BEATRICE: Don't get me started on that.
RUTH: Mama,please ...
BEATRICE: Do you want a cigarette?
RUTH: Leave out the part where they shoot the horses, though.
BEATRICE: Honey, you know the whole story RUTH: "Apples! Pears! Cu .. .cumbers!"
BEATRICE: No. It's "Apples! Pears! Cucum . .. bers!"
BEATRICE AND RUTH: "Apples! Pears! Cucum ... bers!"
RUTH: How did you get the wagon out without him seeing you?
BEATRICE: That was easy. Every time.he got home for the day he'd make us both
some sandwiches - my mama had been dead for years - and he'd take a nap on the
old sofa that used to be ... there! And while he was sleeping I got the horses hitched up
and went riding around the block waving to everyone.
RUTH: Oh, Mama, you didn't!
BEATRICE: Of course I did. I had more nerve than a bear when I was a kid. Let me tell
you it takes nerve to sit up on that wagon every day yelling "Apples! ... Pears!
Cucum . .. bers !"
RUTH: Did he find out you took the wagon?
[Put the flashlight on her face. - fl
BEATRICE: Did he find out? He came running down the street after me and started
spanking me right on top of the wagon - not hard - but it was so embarrassing [Enact the story. + m] and I had one of those penny marshmallow ships in the back
pocket of my overalls, and it got all squished. And you better believe I never did it
again ... [Ruth, drop the flashlight. - fj You would have loved him, Ruth, and gone
out with him on the wagon ... all over Stapleton yelling as loud as you wanted.
[Lightning. Then Ruth drop the flashlight. - m]*RUTH: "Apples! Pears! C11 ... cumbers!"
BEATRICE: No!
RUTH: "Cuc11m ... bers!"
BEATRICE: My father made up for all the other men in this whole world, Ruth. If only
you two could have met. He'd only be about seventy now, do you realize that? And
I'll bet he'd still be selling vegetables around town. All that fun - and then I don't
think I ever knew what really hit me.
RUTH: Don't tell about BEA TRICE: Don't worry about the horses.
RUTH: What hit you?

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE: Well it was just me and Papa ... and your father hanging around. And then
Papa got sick ... and I drove with him up to the sanatorium. And then I came home
and there were the horses RUTH: Mother 1
!Tell her about the horses. - mJ !Tell her about Equus. + mJ
BEATRICE: And I had the horses ... taken care of. And then Papa got terribly sick and
he begged me to marry so that he'd be sure I'd be talcen care of. If he knew how I was
taken care of he'd tnrn over in his grave. And nightmares! Do yon want to know the
nightmare I nsed to have? I never had nightmares over the fights with your father, or
the divorce, or this thrombosis - he deserved it - I never had nightmares over any of
that. Let me tell you about my nightmare that used to come back and back: [Light
Beatrice's face with the flashlight. - fJ Well, I'm on Papa's wagon, but it's newer
and shinier, [Bring back the rain. - fl*- and it's being pulled by beautiful white
[Bring back Nanny. + m) horses, not dirty workhorses - these are like circus horses
with long manes and tinsel - [Make the rain louder. - m) and the wagon is blue,
shiny blue. And it's full - filled with yellow apples and grapes and green squash.
[Tillie, come listen to this. - fJ You're going to laugh when you hear this. [Tell The
Aristocrats joke.+ m) I'm wearing a lovely gown with jewels all over it, and my hair
is piled up on top of my head with a long feather in it, and the bells are ringing. Huge
bells swinging on a gold braid strung across the back of the wagon, and they're going
DONG, DONG ... DONG, DONG. And I'm yelling "APPLES! PEARS!
CUC UM ... BERS!"
[Nannv, wake up. - fJ [Come on. - m)
RUTH: That doesn't sound like a nightmare to me.
[Put the spot on Ruth. - mJ
BEATRICE: And then I tnrn down our street and all the noise stops. !Try projecting.+
fl This long street, with all the doors of the houses shut and everything crowded next
to each other, and there's not a soul around. And then I start getting afraid that the
vegetables are going to spoil.. .and that nobody's going to buy anything, and I feel as
though I shouldn't be on the wagon, and I keep trying to call out. But there isn't a
sound. !Lots of consecutive lightning strikes.+ m) Not a single sound. Then I tnrn
my head and look at the house across the street. I see an upstairs window, and a pair
of hands pull the curtains slowly apart. [Show the spotlight representing an
upstairs window. - m) I see the face ofmy father and my heart stands still... Ruth ...
take the light out of my eyes.
[Rain dance with the flashlight. + fJ [Whistle a happy tune. + fl !Tell The Zoo
Story. - m)
RUTH: Is Nanny going to die here?
BEATRICE: No.
[Bring back the electricity. - mj
RUTH: How can you be sure?
BEATRICE: I can tell.
RUTH: Are you crying?
[Ruth, assume the mother role. - fJ
BEATRICE: What's left for me, Ruth?
RUTH: What, Mama?

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE: What's left for me?
I.vii
[Nanny, close your legs. + ml [IN + ml [Drink some liquor. - ml [Tillie, sit
somewhere we can see you.+ ml# [Drink it. - ml
TILLIE: What are you doing?
BEA TRICE: A little housecleaning, and you're going to help. You can start by getting
rid of that rabbit or I'll suffocate the bastard. You don't think I will, do you? You
wait and see. Where's Ruth? She's probably running around the schoolyard in her
brassiere.
TILLIE: Mother, they want me to do something at school.
BEATRICE: NANNY! DID YOU HEAR THAT? THEY WANT HER TO DO
SOMETHING AT SCHOOL! ISN'T THAT MOMENTOUS, NANNY? Well I want
you to do something around here. Like get rid of that bunny. I'm being generous! I'll
let you give it away. Far away. Give it to Mr. Goodman. I'd chloroform the thing
myself, but that crazy sister of yours would throw convulsions for fifty years ... and I
hate a house that vibrates. And get rid of those sterile marigolds. They stink! HI,
NANNY - HOW ARE YOU, HONEY? HOW WOULD YOU LIKE TO GO ON A
LONG TRIP? You see, everybody, I spent today taking stock of my life and I've
come up with zero. I added up all the separate departments and the total reads zero ...
zero zero zero zero zero zero [IN - ml zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero
zero zero zero ... And do you know how you pronounce that, with all your
grammatical schoolin' and foolin'? You pronounce it o,o,o,o, [Stop saying zero. !!!1 0,0,0,0,0,0,! o,o,o,o,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0! [Tillie, tell her to stop. - fl Right,
Nanny? [Tillie, speak Spanish. + fl RIGHT, NANNY? [Start crying, Tillie. - fl
[Tillie, drink the beer. - m) [Beatrice, get laryngitis. - fl So, by the end of the
week, you get rid of that cottontail compost heap and we'll get you a job down at the
five-and-ten-cent store. [Tillie, walk away. - m) And if you don't do so well with the
public, we'll fix you up with some kind of machine. [Smack Tillie on the head. - mJ
Wouldn't that be nice?
RUTH: Can you believe it? I didn't, until C1u·is Burns came up and told me about it in
Geography, and then Mr. Goodman told me himself during the eighth period in the
office when I was eavesdropping. Aren't you so happy you could bust? Tillie? I'm so
proud I can't believe it, Mama. Everybody was talking about it and nobody ... well, it
was the first time they all came up screaming about her and I said, "Yes, she's my
sister!" I said it, "She's my sister! My sister! My sister'" [IN - mJ Give me a
cigarette.
BEATRICE: Get your hands off my personal property.
RUTH: I'll scratch your back later.
BEATRICE: I don't want you to touch me!
RUTH: Did he call yet? My God, I can't believe it, I just can't!
BEATRICE: Did who call yet?
RUTH: I'm not supposed to tell you, as Mr. Goodman's private secretary, but you're
going to get a call from school.
BEATRICE: What is she talking about?
TILLIE: I was in the Science Fair at school.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

RUTH: Didn't she tell you yet? Oh, Tillie, how could you? She's fantastic, Mama! She's
a finalist in the Science Fair. There were only five of them out of hundreds and
hundreds. She won with all those plants over there. They're freaks 1 Isn't that a
scream? Dr. Berg picked her himself. The principal! And I heard Mr. Goodman say
she was going to be another Madam Pasteur and he never saw a girl do anything like
that before and ... [Fall. - m) so I told everybody, "Yes, she's my sister!" Tillie,
"You're my sister!" I said. And Mr. Goodman called the Advance and they're coming
to take your picture. [Go hug Tillie. - fl Oh, Mama, isn't it crazy? And nobody
laughed at her, Mama. She beat out practically everybody and nobody laughed at her.
(Fall off the sofa. - ml "She's my sister," I said. "She's my sister!" That must be
him! (Answer the phone. - m) Mama, answer it - I'm afraid. (You're not afraid
anymore.+ ml Answer it before he hangs up 1 (IN - m) Mama! He's gonna hang up!
(Nanny, answer the phone.+ m) (IN - m) Hello? .. .Yes ... It's him! ... Just a minute,
please ... He wants to talk to you.
BEATRICE: Who?
(Tell him you have an abusive mother. - m)
RUTH: The principal!
BEATRICE: Hang up.
RUTH: I told him you were here! Mama!
(Nanny, say something.+ m) (Start groaning again. - m) (Wake up, Nanny. - f)
BEATRICE: Yes? .. .I know who you are, Dr. Berg ... [Nanny, throw the beer at
Beatrice. - m) I see ... Couldn't you get someone else? There's an awful lot of work
that has to be done around here, because she's not as careful with her home duties as
she is with man-in-the-moon marigolds ... [Nanny, fall out of the chair. + m) Me?
(Tillie, get very nervous. - m) What would you want with me up on the stage? ... The
other mothers can do as they please ... ! would have thought (IN - m) you had enough
in your history without ... I'll think about it ... [Ruth, drink the beer. - m) Goodbye,
Dr. Berg ... I SAID I'D THINK ABOUT IT!
RUTH: What did he say?
BEATRICE: How could you do this to me? HOW COULD YOU LET THAT MAN
CALL OUR HOME! I have no clothes, do you hear me? I'd look just like you up on
the stage, ugly little you! (Tillie, slap your mother. - m) DO YOU WANT THEM
TO LAUGH AT US? LAUGH AT THE TWO OF US?
(Crush her marigolds. - m)
RUTH: Mother. .. aren't you proud of her? Mother ... it's an honor.
TILLIE: But. .. nobody laughed at me.
[Ruth, defend your sister's honor.+ m[
BEATRICE: Oh, my God ...
[Light the scene change. - fj [Houselights. - ml#+

II.i
RUTH: The only competition you have to worry about is Janice Vickery. They say she
caught it near Princess Bay Boulevard and it was still alive when she took the skin off
it.
TILLIE: Let me do that please, Ruth.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

RUTH: I'm sorry I touched them, really.
TILLIE: Why don't you feed Peter?
RUTH: Because I don't feel like feeding him ... Now I feel like feeding him. I heard that
it screamed for three minutes after she put it in because the water wasn't boiling yet.
[Let the rabbit be dead. - m[ How much talent does it take to boil the skin off a cat
and then stick the bones together again? (A lot of talent. - ml That's what I want to
know. Ugh. I had a dream about that, too. I figure she did it in less than a day and she
ends up as one of the top five winners ... and you spend months growing atomic
flowers.
TILLIE: Don't you think you should finish getting ready?
RUTH: Finish? This is it!
TILLIE: Are you going to wear that sweater?
RUTH: Look, don't worry about me. I'm not getting up on any stage, and if I did I
wouldn't be caught dead with a horrible bow like that.
TILLIE: Mother put it RUTH: They're going to laugh you off the stage again like when you cranked that atom
in assembly .. .! didn't mean that. .. The one they're going to laugh at is Mama.
TILLIE: What?
RUTH: I said the one they're going to laugh at is Mama ... Oh, let me take that bow off.
TILLIE: It's all right.
RUTH: Look, just sit still. I don't want everybody making fun of you.
TILLIE: What made you say that about Mama?
RUTH: Oh, I heard them talking in the Science Office yesterday. Mr. Goodman and
Miss Hanley. She's getting $12.63 to chaperon the thing tonight.
TILLIE: What were they saying?
RUTH: Miss Hanley was telling Mr. Goodman about Mama ... when she found out you
were one of the five winners. And he wanted to know if there was something wrong
with Mama because she sounded crazy over the phone. And Miss Hanley said she
was crazy and she always has been crazy and she can't wait to see what she looks like
after all these years. Miss Hanley said her nickname used to be Betty the Loon.
TILLIE: Ruth, you're hurting me.
RUTH: She was just like you and everybody thought she was a big weirdo. There! You
look much better! Peter, ifanybody stuck you in a pot of boiling water I'd kill them,
do you know that? ... What do they call boiling the skin off a cat? I call it murder,
that's what I call it. They say it was hit by a car and Janice just scooped it up and
before you could say bingo it was screaming in a pot of boiling water. .. [Ruth, recite
Hamlet. - ml [Peter, poop on Ruth.+ m) Do you know what they're all waiting to
sec? Marna's feathers! That's what Miss Hanley said. She said Marna blabs as though
she was the Queeu of England and just as proper as can be, and that her idea of
getting dressed up is to put on all the feathers in the world and go as a bird. Always
trying to get somewhere, like a great big bird.
TILLIE: Don't tell Mama, please. It doesn't matter.
RUTH: I was up there watching her getting dressed and sure enough, she's got the
feathers out.
TILLIE: You didn't tell her what Miss Hanley said 7

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

RUTH: Are you kidding? I just told her I didn't like the feathers and I didn't think she
should wear any. But I'll bet she doesn't listen to me.
TILLIE: It doesn't matter.
RUTH: It doesn't matter? Do you think I want to be laughed right out of the school
tonight, with Chris Bums there, and all? Laughed right out of the school, with your
electric hair and her feathers on that stage, and Miss Hanley splitting her sides 9
TILLIE: Promise me you won't say anything.
RUTH: On one condition.
TILLIE: What?
RUTH: Give Peter to me.
TILLIE: The taxi will be here any minute and I won't have all this stuff ready. Did you
see my speech?
RUTH: I mean it. Give Peter to me.
TILLIE: He belongs to all ofus.
RUTH: For me. All for me. What do you care? He doesn't mean anything to you
anymore, now that you've got all those crazy plants.
TILLIE: Will you stop?
RUTH: If you don't give him to me I'm going to tell Mama that everybody's waiting to
laugh at her.
TILLIE: Where are those typewritten cards?
RUTH: I MEAN IT! Give him to me!
TILLIE: Does he mean that much to you?
RUTH: Yes!
TILLIE: All right.
RUTH: Betty the Loon ... That's what they used to call her, you know. Betty the Loon!
TILLIE: I don't think that's very nice.
RUTH: First they had Betty the Loon, and new they've got Tillie the Loon ... You don't
have to worry about me turning you in for any old plants ... How much does a taxi cost
from here to the school?
TILLIE: Not much.
RUTH: I wish she'd give me the money it costs for a taxi- and for all that cardboard and
paint and flowerpots and stuff. The only time she ever made a fuss over me was when
she drove me nuts.
TILLIE: Tell her to hurry, please.
RUTH: By the way, I went over to see Janice Vickery's pot, that she did you know what
in, and I started telling her and her mother about the worms in Mr. Alexander
Brougham's legs, and I got thrown out because it was too near dinner time. That Mrs.
Vickery kills me. She can't stand worms in somebody else's legs but she lets her
daughter cook a cat.
TILLIE: Mother! The taxi will be here any minute.
BEATRICE: You're lucky I'm coming, without all this rushing me.
TILLIE: Mama, you look beautiful.
BEATRICE: Don't put it on too thick. [Red spot on Beatrice. - ml*- I said I'd go and I
guess there's no way to get out of it. Do you mind telling me how I'm supposed to get
up on the stage? Do they call my name or what 0 And where are you going to be? If

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

you ask me, they should've sent all the parents a mimeographed sheet of instructions.
If this is supposed to be such a great event, why don't they do it right?
(Blue spot on Beatrice. - ml*+
TILLIE: You just sit on the stage with the other parents before it begins.
BEATRICE: How long is this going to last? And remember, I don't care even if you do
win the whole damn thing, I'm not making any speech. I can hold my own anywhere,
but I hated that school when I went there and I hate it now ... and the only thing I'd
have to say is, what a pack of stupid teachers and vicious children they have. Imagine
someone tearing the skin off a cat.
RUTH: She didn't tear it. She boiled it off.
BEATRICE: You just told me upstairs that girl tore the skin off with an orange knife
and ... do you know, sometimes you exasperate me? If you've got all the plants in this
box, I can manage the folding thing. Do you know I've got a headache from doing
those titles? And you probably don't even like them.
TILLIE: I like them very much.
BEATRICE: Look, if you don't want me to go tonight, I don't have to. (Rub lipstick all
over your face. - ml You're about as enthusiastic as a dummy about this whole
thing.
TILLIE: I'm sorry.
BEATRICE: And I refuse to let you get nervous. Put that bow back in your hair.
RUTH: I took it out.
BEATRICE: What did you do that for?
RUTH: Because it made her look crazy.
BEATRICE: How would you know what's crazy or not? (Make Ruth change her
clothes. She looks like a slut. + f( If that sweater of yours was any tighter it'd cut off
the circulation in your chest. The bow looks very nice in your hair. There's nothing
wrong with looking proper, Matilda, and if you don't have enough money to look
expensive and perfect, people like you for trying to look nice. You know, one day
maybe you will be pretty. You'll have some nice features, when that hair revives and
you do some tricks with makeup. I hope you didn't crowd the plants too close
together. (IN - ml Did you find your speech?
TILLIE: Yes, mother.
BEATRICE: You !mow, Matilda, I was wondering about something. Do you think
you're really going to win? I mean, not that you won't be the best, but there's so
much politics in school. Don't laugh, but if there's anyone who's an expert on that,
it's me, and someday I'm going to write a book and blast that school to pieces. If
you' re just a little bit different in this world, they try to kill you off.
RUTH: Tillie gave Peter to me.
BEATRICE: Oh? Then you inhe1ited the rabbit droppings I found upstairs. What are
you doing with your coat on?
RUTH: I'm going out to wait for the taxi.
BEATRICE: Oh, no you're not. (IN - m) You start right in on the rabbit droppings. Or
you won't get another cigarette even if you scratch my back with an orange knife.
RUTH: I'm going down to the school with you.

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

BEATRICE: Oh, no yon're not! Yon're going to keep company with that corpse in
there. If she wakes np and starts gagging jnst slip her a shot of whiskey. Quick! Grab
the plants, Matilda - I'll get the big thing.
RUTH: I want to go! I promised Chris Burns I'd meet him.
BEATRICE: Can't you understand English?
RUTH: I've got to go!
BEATRICE: Shut up!
RUTH: I don't care! I'M GOING ANYWAY!
BEATRICE: WHAT DID YOU SAY?
TILLIE: Mother!
BEA TRICE: Huny up with that box, Matilda, and tell him to stop blowing the horn.
HURRY UP! (Report your mother for child abuse. + ml I don't know where you
ever got the idea you were going tonight. Did you think nobody was going to hold
down the fort? ... Now you know how I felt all those years you and everybody else was
rurrning out whenever they felt like it - because there was always me to watch over
the fifty-dollar-a-week corpse. If there's one thing I demand it's respect. I don't ask
for anything from you but respect.
RUTH: Why are you ashamed of me?
BEATRICE: I've been seen with a lot worse than you. I don't even know why I'm going
tonight, do you know that? Do you think I give one goddamn about the whole
thing? ... Do you want to know why I'm going? Do you really want to know why this
once somebody else has to stick with that dried prune for a few minutes? Because this
is the first time in my life I've ever felt just a little bit proud over something. Isn't that
silly? Somewhere in the back of this turtle-sized brain of mine I feel just a little
proud! Jesus Christ! And you begrudge me even that, you little bastard.
RUTH: Huny up. They're waiting for you ... They're all waiting for you.
BEATRICE: I hope the paint is dry ... Who's waiting for me?
(Don't tell her. - m) [Don't do it. - fl
RUTH: Everybody .. .including Miss Hanley. She's been telling all the teachers ... about
you ... and they're all waiting.
[Ruth, come stand in the aisle and do this scene. - m)
BEA TRICE: You're such a little liar, Ruth, do you know that? When you can't have
what you want, you try to ruin it for everybody else.
RUTH: Goodnight, [Red spot on Ruth. - m( Betty the Loon.
BEATRI CE: Take this thing.
RUTH: What for?
BEA TRICE: Go with Matilda.
RUTH: I don't want to go now.
BEATRICE: GET OUT OF HERE'
RUTH: Now Tillie's going to blame it on me that you're not going - and take the rabbit
back. I can't help it what people call you. I'll tell Tillie you'll be down later, all
right? ... Don't answer me. What do I care!
(Take your aggression out on Nanny.+ m) (Go get the chloroform. - m(
(Light the scene change. - fJ (Light the scene change. - m) (Change the music. Put
on The Beetles. - f( (Light the scene change. - m) (Come on. - m) [IN - f(
[Put the rain on again. - m (

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

II.ii
JANICE: The Past: I got the cat from the A.S.P.C.A. immediately after it had been
killed by a high-altitude pressure system. That explains why some of the rib bones are
missing, because that method sucks the air out of the animal's lungs and ruptures all
cavities. They say it prevents cruelty to animals but I think it's horrible. Then I boiled
the cat in a sodium hydroxide solution until most of the skin pulled right of±: but I had
to scrape some of the grizzle off the joints with a knife. You have no idea how
difficult it is to get right down to the bones. I have to go on to The Present, now - but
I did want to tell you how long it took me to put the thing together. I mean, as it is
now, it's extremely useful for students of anatomy, even with the missing rib bones,
and it can be used to show basic anatomical aspects of many, many animals that are
in the same family as felines. I suppose that's about the only present uses I can think
for it, but it is nice to remember as an accomplishment, and it looks good on college
applications to show you did something else in school besides dating. The Future:
The only future plans I have for Tabby - my little brother asked the A.S.P.C.A. what
its name was when he went to pick it up and they said it was called Tabby, but I think
they were kidding him -I mean as far as future plans, I'm going to donate it to the
science department, of course, and next year, if there's another Science Fair perhaps
I'll do the same thing with a dog. Thank you very much for your attention, and I hope
I win!

II.iii
BEATRJCE: I want to talk to the principal, please ... Well, you'll have to get him down
off the stage ... It's none of your goddanm business who I am! ... Oh, I see ... Yes. I have
a message for him and Mr. Goodman, and you, too ... And this is for Miss Hanley,
too ... Tell them Mrs. Hunsdorfer called to thank them for making her wish she was
dead ... Would you give them that message, please? ... Thank you very much.
[Answer it. - m[ (Answer it. - ml [Commit suicide. - m) [Chloroform yourself. mj (The phone rings again. - m) [Wrong number.+ m)
BEATRICE: Hello. This is Mrs. Hunsdorfer. . .I'm sorry if I frightened you, I wouldn't
want you to think Nanny had deceased or anything like that - I can imagine how
terrible you'd feel if anything like that ever happened ... Terrible tragedy thar would
be, Miss Career Woman of the Year ... Yes, I'll tell you why I'm calling. I want her
out of here by tomorrow. 1 told you when you rolled her in here I was going to try her
out for a while and if I didn't like her she was to get the hell out. Well I don't like her,
so get her the hell out... It's like this. I don't like the way she cheats at solitaire. Is
that a good enough reason 9 ... Fine. And if she's not out of here by noon I'll send her
collect in an ambulance, you son of a bitch!
(Have a fit of rage. Destrov stuff. - fl
[Pull the tablecloth off the table. - m(
(Hammer Time. - m)
[Trip over something. - m[
(Slow-motion. - m[
[Chloroform the rabbit. - m) (chorus of "No." and "No don't." but also some
"Do it.") [The rabbit escapes. + m) (Kill yourself instead. - m) (several IN)
)Throw the rabbit from the balcony. - m) [Throw the rabbit from the stairs. m] [Save the rabbit. - mi (Spotlight on the cage.+ m]

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

II.iv
[Forget all your lines. - ml
TILLIE: The Past: The seeds were exposed to various degrees ... of gamma rays from
radiation sources in Oak Ridge ... Mr. Goodman helped me pay for the seeds ... Their
growth was plotted against. .. [Gain some confidence. - m] time. The Present: Tbe
seeds which received little radiation have grown to plants which are normal in
appearance. The seeds which received moderate radiation gave rise to mutations such
as double blooms, giant stems, and variegated leaves. The seeds closest to the gamma
source were killed or yielded dwarf plants. The Future: After radiation is better
understood, a day will come when the power of exploding atoms will change the
whole world we know. Some of the mutations will be good ones - wonderful things
beyond our dreams - and I believe, I believe this with all my heart, THE DAY WILL
COME WHEN MANKIND WILL THANK GOD FOR THE STRANGE AND
BEAUTIFUL ENERGY FROM THE ATOM.
[Run crew, do a little dance.+ rn] [Cut the scene change music. - rnj*+ [chorus of
"Thank you."] [Turn the lights on. - ml [Keep them off. - ml

Il.v
RUTH: MAMA! MAMA! She won! Marna! Where are you? She won! [Look at the
cage. - ml Hurry up! Hurry! Oh, my God, I can't believe it! [IN - m] Marna! Corne
on down! Hurry! [Blackout for five minutes. - f] Give me that! Marna! Wait till you
see this! Marna! She won ... [Fall down the stairs. - m] Didn't you hear me? [IN mj Tillie won the whole thing!. .. Marna? ... What's the matter with you? What did you
rip the paper off the windows for?
[Warmer lighting. - mj*TILLIE: Marna? Are you going to open a ... shop?
RUTH: What's the matter? Can't you even answer?
BEATRICE: Hand me some of those tacks.
RUTH: I SAID SHE WON! ARE YOU DEAF?
BEA TRICE: Ruth, if you don't shut up I'm going to have you put away.
RUTH: They ought to put you away, BETTY THE LOON!
[Ruth, take the dead rabbit away from your mother. - ml
BEATRICE: The rabbit is in your room. I want you to bury it in the morning.
RUTH: If you did anything .. .I'LL KILL YOU!
TILLIE: Mother, you didn't kill it, did you?
BEATRICE: Nanny goes tomorrow. First thing tomorrow.
TILLIE: Ruth? Are you all right?
BEATRICE: I don't know what it's going to be. Maybe a tea shop. Maybe not. After
school you're going to have regular hours. You'll work in the kitchen, you'll learn
how to cook, and you're going to earn your keep, just like in any other business.
TILLIE: Marna .. .I think she's going to go. Don't go ... don't go ... Help me! Marna! Help
me!
BEATRICE: Snap out of it, do you hear me? RUTH, DON'T LET YOURSELF GO!
Help me get her downstairs!
BEATRICE: Get the wooden spoon!
[Beatrice, show remorse. - f] [Tillie, put the blanket on her. - f]

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

TILLIE: Shall I call the doctor? ... Shall I call the doctor"
BEATRICE: No. (Do it anyway. - m] She'll be all right.
TILLIE: I think we should call him.
BEATRICE: I DIDN'T ASK YOU WHAT YOU THOUGHT 1••• We're going to need
every penny to get this place open.
(Tillie, call the doctor. - mJ*+ (Tillie, go to Ruth. - f] (Cooler lighting.+ m]
TILLIE: I'd better bury him in the backyard.
BEATRICE: Don't bury the towel.
(Bury it anyway. + f]
TILLIE: I'll do it in the morning.
(Bury it now. - m] [Tillie, put the blanket over Ruth. - m] [Red spot on Beatrice.
::..fl (Red spot on Beatrice. - m]
BEATRICE: Matilda?
TILLIE: Yes, Mama?
BEA TRICE: I hate the world. Do you know that, Matilda?
TILLIE: Yes, Mama.
BEATRICE: I hate the world.
(Blue spot on Ruth. - m] (Tillie, move closer to Ruth. - f]
TILLIE: The Conclusion: My experiment has shown some of the strange effects
radiation can produce ... and how dangerous it can be if not handled correctly. Mr.
Goodman said I should tell in this conclusion what my future plans are and how this
experiment has helped me make them. For one thing, the effect of gamma rays on
man-in-the-moon marigolds has made me curious about the sun and the stars, [Spot
on Tillie. - m] for the universe itself must be like a world of great atoms- and I want
to know more about it. But most important, I suppose, my experiment has made me
feel important - every atom in me, in everybody, has come from the sun - from
places beyond our dreams. The atoms of our hands, the atoms of our hearts ... Atom.
Atom. What a beautiful word.

THE END

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

APPENDIXH
Audience Survey Responses
Nov. 2, Thursday- 8 pm
1) Did yon feel comfortable offering suggestions? Why or why not?
'No - I was never quite sure what to suggest.'
'Sort of. It was hard to know what should/would be changed.'
'I personally didn't feel comfortable offering suggestions because the drama seemed too
serious to interrupt.'

'In the beginning yes. The atmosphere was more lighthearted and thus welcoming to
suggestions. The end ... I wouldn't have said a word. Deep stuff!'
'Yes, but not the first one and didn't quite know what to suggest. Also, when it got
serious I felt less comfortable.'
'No - because it didn't seem the actors took them.'
'Yes I did, when the atmosphere warranted it.'
2) Did you identify with any of the characters" Why or why not?
'No - too dysfimctional.'
'Elements of them- frustration, [illegible], to succeed desperately, the acting and plot
were effective in this regard with monologue, period of silence, lighting (mood).'
'[blank]'
'No. I'm not particularly sure. I've never been close to anyone in such a situation.'
'Tillie - someone not appreciating my accomplishment.'
'No - they were all too crazy.'
'Haha ... Matilda.'
3) Did the suggestions better or detract from the drama?
'Better.'
'Neither, 1 think, they were minimal enough.'
'l felt the suggestions offered some comic relief in intense scenes.'
'Better. Definitely. Made it more interesting.'
'Added.'
'Calling out detracted, but I liked when they were enacted.'
'No, it ran very well.'·
4) How did the "vocal audience" shape your experience?
'Made the play more interesting-I wasn't expecting it.'
'Did feel more "allowed" to express opinion about progress of the performance.'
'It made an otherwise serious, intense drama comical in some instances.·

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Antln-opology

'More fun more inviting.'
'Some made some silly comments, but others were very intriguing.'
'Distracting.'
'It made it much more enjoyable and interactive.'

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

APPENDIXH
Audience Survey Responses
Nov. 3, Friday- 7:30 pm
1) Did you feel comfortable offering suggestions? Why or why not?
'I felt that if I had had something to suggest, I most certainly would have. But it was
already so amazing that I wouldn't change anything.'
'Yes, onee the others got into it. But not during the more serious scenes.'
'No - because I'm too old and [illegible] and feel like it would be an intrusion.'
'Yes, but there didn't seem to be many good opportunities to make good ones.'
'Not always. I wasn't sure what it meant to necessarily "pertain to the artistic movement"
I think?'
'Only towards the end.'
'Yes - Everyone is doing it!'
'Yes - other people were.'
'Yes. Please change or remove smoking. It was physically uncomfortable. I reacted to the
smoke. Pretend to smoke.'
'Yes, once other people started to.'

2) Did you identify with any of the characters? Why or why not?
'Strangely (and perhaps egotistically enough) yes - Matilda. And later Ruth. And in the
future, Beatrice. It was incredible.'
'As a youngest child who grew up feeling out of place in her family, I found myself
identifying with Tillie, but the mother's shame and anxiety was also so palpable and real
that it cut across the boundaries of age and family position.'
'Yes - bits and pieces - we all know people with those characteristics.'
[blank]
'Yes: the play was very true to life; excellent writing. Perhaps an inconclusive ending?'
'No.'
'Tillie- standard [illegible].'
[blank]
'No.'
'Tilly to some degree for the interest in school.'
3) Did the suggestions better or detract from the drama?
'Both during the play, but the actors were good at sorting out what to follow. In the end,
for that reason, I suppose it bettered.'
'The suggestions seemed to help heighten the drama and give the play a sense of
improvisation. It called attention to the actors as performers.'
'Some were arnusing. 1

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Antln·opology

'Some bettered, most detracted.'
'Bettered it, though I wish there had been more.'
'Detract.'
'The "bad" ones detract. The ones adding to the drama are good.'
'Detract.'
'Detract.'

'Didn't really effect it at all.'
4) How did the 'vocal audience' shape your experience?
'I felt that ifl had wanted to play the director role I would have, and it changed my
experience in that there was simply nothing (about voices, projectors, lighting - nothing)
that I wanted to change, so I realized how well directed it was. Thank you for an amazing
production.'
'The vocal audience made me acutely aware of our need for comic relief and the way it
made the poignant moments in the play that much more meaningful. I was also struck by
how much we all felt angry and wanted to intervene and felt caught by our inability to
help the family.'
'Encouraged me to stay interested.'
'It added in general, event the bad suggestions at least help get passed the slow and tense
parts.'
'It was a neat option to have, but I didn't notice as much because not many people
spoke.'
'They made it funny.'
'It was new and fresh. '
'I was confused about it.'
'Did not help.'
'Didn't really effect it.'

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

APPENDIXH
Audience Survey Responses
Nov. 3, Friday-10:00 pm
I) Did you feel comfortable offering suggestions" Why or why not?
'Yes - many people were talking and it was dark.'
'Yes but probably only after others had already done so. Also, it got easier the more
humorous it was.'
'No, I did not. It felt like a competition in the audience to get the approval of a particular
suggestion.'
'Yes, even though it took a while into the play. One reason I might've been somewhat
reserved was because few suggestions were enacted, and whatever was enacted did not
affect the overarching plot. Only silly things were affected.'
'Yes, because many other audience members were.'
[blank]
'Originally no - not to stand out when no one else was doing so. Later - felt comfortable
by the amount of others interacting.'
'No, because most of them got no response.'
'Not in the very beginning. Eventually I did.'
'For the most paii - though I felt the production didn't change much per our suggestions.'
'After the ice was broken yes, though there still was a degree of separation between the
audience and the actors.'
'Yes because everyone was shouting suggestions and it was so dark so no one could see
you!'
'No, because I didn't want to pose stupid comments to detract the actors.'
'Yes, because the other audience members were so eager.'
'Yes, b/c it was dark.'
'Yes, in that enough people were making them. No, in that suggestions were seldom
taken.'
'Yes. I mostly felt that my suggestions could have been taken seriously and would not
have detracted from the play.'
'Yes. It was the point of the experiment.'
'Occasionally I'd think of a suggestion but wanted to wait till a break between lines so I
wouldn't interrupt anything, and the moment would pass and I'd miss my chance.'
'No.'

'Yes, because I just would do this sort of thing.'
'Sometimes. I didn't want to miss plot.'
'Yes, once the first person made a suggestion I felt very comfortable.'
'I did feel comfortable but was confused cos of the superfluity.'
'Yes, because other people were.'
'Initially I thought I did not but then they started incorporating suggestions so then I did.'

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

2) Did you identify with any of the characters? Why or why not 9
'I identified with Tilly- not sure why.'
'Matilda b/c the actions I wanted to happen would have happened through her.'
'No, they seemed more like caricatures than real people.'
'Matilda played her part very well, and exuded emotion.'
'Yes, because at certain times everyone feels crazy, inadequate, and a point of derision.'
[blank]
'Yes -with Nanny. Mother had Alzheimer's disease and I could understand the
deterioration in the character.'
'A little with each one. Because we are all cynics, dreamers and just plain ditsy.'
'Identified with concept of [illegible].'
'Yes, the mother and Matilda.'
'No I did not.'
'No, hopefully not.'
'Yes, both Ruth and Tilly.'
'No.'

[blank]
'Yes - Matilda. I felt she understood when saying something will push things over the
edge.'
'·No.'

[blank]
'With Matilda. It reminds me of my family.'
'Mostly with Matilda, but this play is pretty far removed from my actual life
experiences.'
'Yes, because they are believable.'
'Maybe w/ Tillie. Underappreciated for my talents by my parents.'
'I did not identify with any of the characters. Maybe if the audience input was responded
to.'

'The one time I identified was when the sisters took each others' side even though they
fought a lot.'
'No I did not.'
3) Did the suggestions better or detract from the drama?
'By the end I was sick of the suggestions that just tried to be funny.'
'Some bettered it. Since most were humorous or ignored, they detracted.'
'Detract.' It was hard for the dramatic action to really take form.'
'They made it more fun, and lightened the mood.'
'Neither.'
'Detract.'
'Some interesting and others detracted from the intensity of the drama. Some interaction
- seemed as if audience not trying to constmctive but rather to have fun 1'
'Detract. Most of them were attempts at being funny.'

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

'Most of the suggestions I thought were just stupid. Not taken seriously. Jokes should be
forbidden.'
'1 st act - better. 2nd act - detract.'
'I think they detracted a bit since they made you aware this was theatre - not an illusion.'
'Mostly detract. There were some thoughtful ones, but they did not really effect the play
and were pretty useless.'
'Detract.'

'Neutral- the actors didn't accept enough of them for a noticeable effect.'
'Detract mostly, though set suggestions helped (like lighting, music).'
'I think some suggestions would have bettered the drama, but they were not taken. Some
suggestions were distracting.'
'Detract.'
'Better.'
'I felt like very few of the suggestions that were accepted had significant effects either
way, honestly - most of the suggestions ( even serious ones) that would have significant
effects were ignored.'
'Both.'
'They barely changed the drama at all. Nothing significant was change.'
'Usually detract- but could better in theory.'
'Definitely detract.'
'The actors weren't responsive enough.'
'It depended on if they were serious or not.'
'I think it bettered the drama.'

4) How did the "vocal audience" shape your experience?
'lt made the show more fun, just listening to the voices that weren't onstage.'
'It was easier to pay attention to the play realizing there's an entire group with you. Also,

good to see what others pay attention to.'
'It destroyed all of the beauty and emotion.'
[blank]
'It added some relief to a very serious performance.'
[blank]
'Kept my interest throughout - Even when lulls in the script (i.e. Papa and the horses,
etc.).'
'Made a good play with great actors into an average one with people shouting.'
'It was interesting. But sometimes I was irritated with some of the suggestions. Felt like
telling them to shut up.'
'Felt more involved.'
'Interesting experiment - worth the $.'
'Well, it was the first time I was part ofa vocal audience, so the concept itself was
interesting. But overall, the drama would have been more effective without the
suggestions. Maybe a vocal audience would be more appropriate in a comical play.'
'Not much.'
'I liked it.'
'It made a depressing drama humorous. The suggestions were funny for the most part.'

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

'It was definitely experimental, but I think it could be even more so.'

'They made me feel uncomfortable by using humor to alleviate the tension.'
'It was fun, if a little distracting at times.'

'Hmm ... I don't think people were taking it seriously enough. Too many obnoxious
suggestions - not enough people thinking seriously about what might improve the
interestingness of the play.'
'Varied my opinions - made it interesting.'
'It was more funny than experimental.'
'Urn ... I don't' know, a few people said some stupid things.'
'It was fum1y but not productive. The actors were too focnsed/nervous to take most of the
suggestions, and most of the suggestions were purely for humor. I did not find this
experiment successful!'
[blank]
'Sometimes distracting, but more [illegible] to feel I had power.'
'It was a novel experience.'

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

APPENDIXH
Audience Survey Responses
Nov. 4, Saturday- 8:00 pm
1) Did you feel comfortable offering suggestions? Why or why not?
'Comfortable- but chose not to.'
'I didn't 'cause I felt that it was distracting the play.'
'No because I could not think of anything intelligent and constructive, as all of the other
fellow members.'
'Yes, don't' have a problem to try something new. In fact, I was very interested by the
idea.'
'No - I wasn't really sure what to say.'
'Not really ... felt disruptive.'
'Yes - but annoyed that suggestions were so rarely followed.'
'Sure; I'm just that kind of guy.'
'No. But that's just me.'
'Sort of- didn't know what was appropriate.'
'Not really - seems unnatural.'
'Yes, when I thought they were appropriate - out of genuine curiosity.'
'Yes, however after listening to the inane suggestions of fellow audience members, I
decided to not share.'
'No - my daughter was acting.'
'Yes. Though it gets distracting to think of suggestion and enjoy the show.'
'No - Did not feel there was anything that I could contribute that was better than the
direction of the drama.'
'Yes, but the actors never seemed to listen.'
'Absolutely, the show needed them sometimes, at least as far as lights.'
'Yes, because others were doing it.'
'Yes, it was fun.'
'Yes, but less so as time went on and more of them were followed.'
'Yes, but less so as the suggestions became more and more inane. The actors did a good
job of selectively listening and preventing the play from turning into a farce.'
'Yes - during lighter scenes. No - during more intense scenes, too caught up , didn't
want to distract actors.'
2) Did you identify with any of the characters? Why or why not?
[blank]
'Not really 'cause they're all sort of crazy.·
'Nope.'

'Yes, Tillie - does anyone care? (not in the context of "does the audience care".).'
'Yes, all 3 of the main characters - they were phenomenally acted.'

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

'Yes, great acting.'

'Nannie and Tillie were expertly played.'
'Tilly; I can feel her situation. Well acted.'
'Sort of... but I think that the circumstances in the play were more exaggerated than
those in my life.'
[blank]
[blank]
'Tillie's belief in beauty and unity.'
[blank]
'Somewhat- a little more extreme.'
'Yes, trying to impress your parents is identifiable for many.'
'Yes, I could identify the most with the Nanny actor. Very believable and excellent
acting. Very "in character" without any verbalization.'
'They all did a great job. The character of Matilda hit home.'
'No.'
'With Tillie because I'm a nerd.'
'No -this family was very dysfunctional.'
'Yes. Tilly made me cry twice.'
'It seemed like the characters were either so corrupt or so withdrawn that it was hard to
relate to them. Then again, they are in extreme circumstances, so that's not surprising.'
'Aspects in all of them. They are characters so none completely but they were so
volatile/[illegible] uninhibited. Superb acting!!!'
3) Did the suggestions better or detract from the drama?
'Detracted.'
'Detract from the drama.'
'Detract from the drama, esp. the jokes that were NOT pertinent to see a great play.'
'Actors did a good job but I think the script was too concrete for suggestions.'
'I thought they detracted, but it my be because I knew an actor and was thinking of the
participation more as taking away from the actors and their story than as a dialogue.'
'It detracted, tho it offered comic relief.'
'Detracted in the sense that no great risks were taken - take more!'
'It didn't seem like any of them were actually followed. But all in all I'd say it did not
add.'
'They were minimally influential. Actually, I'd recommend that the actors follow them
more often - otherwise they're useless.'
'Detract - perhaps better for comedy.'
'Detract- it would have been slightly more fighting [illegible] less a dramatic piece.'
'Detract.'
'Detract!'
'They relieved the tense plot.'
'I believe it detracted, but the phone suggestion at the end was perfect.'
'Brought audience "in" more.'

'Good, except for the somewhat excessive change in lighting requests.'
'They would have [illegible] if the actors took the suggestions.'

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

'Mostly better, but some random tech suggestions were dumb.'
'Better- it sucked that no one did anything.'
'Detract - the cast did not seem willing enough to listen or get out of their comfort zones
and so there was no real sense of having a voice or control so I thought, what is the point,
it just lets you know you don't count.'
'I felt that the idea added to the drama, but in practice I'm not so sure. Maybe with a
different audience.'
'Detract.'
4) How did the "vocal audience" shape your experience"
'Broke the mood the author was trying to create - and my relationship with the
characters.'
'I didn't really like it.'
'It turned a fantastic play into just a good one.'
'Frustration- due to stupid comments - but I guess you may want the audience to be
frustrated.'
'I think I would have preferred this in a comedy setting - here, it seemed like many
comments were meant to impress each other, and most couldn't be taken. But, a really
interesting idea!'
[blank]
'Show was great, but buy more into the premise and let the show change.'
'It was more comedic than anything - did not seem like the actors really paid attention to
any. The play did not seem suited to it.'
'It was pretty interesting. I sometimes felt like commenting on other people's comments.'
'Illustrated the separation btw the comic and tragic.'
'Made be frustrated b/c of the inappropriateness of some comments.'
'I thought it took away from the written dialogue of the script and distracted the audience
from the emotional content of the scenes.'
'I thought that the audience was too "immature" to have the ability to shout out things. It
lost the connection I felt with ce1iain characteristics/situation due to suggestions like "It's
Hmnmer Time."'
'Both positive and negative. Neg - distracted from the story and effect. Pos - also
relieved some of the tension.'
'I felt like I was part of a fight - [illegible] community but it got a bit distracting.'
'Very interesting- more so than other plays of this intensity.'
'It was certainly unique. Although sometimes suggestions seemed to be shouted out at
inappropriate times.'
[blank]
'Made the performance easier to share and enjoy.'
'It made it so much more fun. It's every audience member's dream to shout at the play.'
[blank]
'It definitely made the play more exciting. I'd like to see something similar again in the
future.'
'Certainly fun at points and freeing to vocalize what I won't/don't want to happen but
[illegible] this mostly distracted from the excellent performance.'

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

APPENDIXH
Audience Survey Responses
Combined
1) Did you feel comfortable offering suggestions? Why or why not?
Thursday, 8 pm
'No - I was never quite sure what to suggest.'
'Sort of. It was hard to know what should/would be changed.'
'I personally didn't feel comfortable offering suggestions because the drama seemed too
serious to interrupt.'
'In the beginning yes. The atmosphere was more lighthearted and thus welcoming to
suggestions. The end ... I wouldn't have said a word. Deep stuff!'
'Yes, but not the first one and didn't quite know what to suggest. Also, when it got
serious I felt less comfortable.'
'No - because it didn't seem the actors took them.'
'Yes I did, when the atmosphere warranted it.'
Friday, 7:30 pm
'I felt that ifl had had something to suggest, I most certainly would have. But it was
already so amazing that I wouldn't change anything.'
'Yes, once the others got into it. But not during the more serious scenes.'
'No - because I'm too old and [illegible] and feel like it would be an intrusion.'
'Yes, but there didn't seem to be many good opportunities to make good ones.'
'Not always. I wasn't sure what it meant to necessarily "pertain to the artistic movement"
I think?'
'Only towards the end.'
'Yes - Everyone is doing it''
'Yes - other people were.'
'Yes. Pkase change or remove smoking. It was physically uncomfortable. I reacted to the
smoke. Pretend to smoke.'
'Yes, once other people started to.'
Friday, 10 pm
'Yes - many people were talking and it was dark.'
'Yes but probably only after others had already done so. Also, it got easier the more
hu1norous it was.'
'No, I did not. It felt like a competition in the audience to get the approval of a particular
suggestion.'
'Yes, even though it took a while into the play. One reason I might've been somewhat
reserved was because few suggestions were enacted, and whatever was enacted did not
affect the overarching plot. Only silly things were affected.·
'Yes, because many other audience members were.'

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

[blank]
'Originally no - not to stand out when no one else was doing so. Later- felt comfortable
by the amount of others interacting.'
'No, because most of them got no response.'
'Not in the very beginning. Eventually I did.'
'For the most part - though I felt the production didn't change much per our suggestions.'
'After the ice was broken yes, though there still was a degree of separation between the
audience and the actors.'
'Yes because everyone was shouting suggestions and it was so dark so no one could see
you!'
'No, because I didn't want to pose stupid comments to detract the actors.'
'Yes, because the other audience members were so eager.'
'Yes, b/c it was dark.'
'Yes, in that enough people were making them. No, in that suggestions were seldom
taken.'
'Yes. I mostly felt that my suggestions could have been taken seriously and would not
have detracted from the play.'
'Yes. It was the point of the experiment.'
'Occasionally I'd think of a suggestion but wanted to wait till a break between lines so I
wouldn't interrupt anything, and the moment would pass and I'd miss my chance.'
'No.'
'Yes, because !just would do this sort of thing.'
'Sometimes. I didn't want to miss plot.'
'Yes, once the first person made a suggestion I felt very comfortable.'
'I did feel comfortable but was confused cos of the superfluity.'
'Yes, because other people were.'
'Initially I thought I did not but then they started incorporating suggestions so then I did.'
Saturday, 8 pm
'Comfortable - but chose not to.'
'I didn't 'cause I felt that it was distracting the play.'
'No because I could not think of anything intelligent and constructive, as all of the other
fellow members.'
'Yes, don't' have a problem to try something new. In fact, I was very interested by the
idea:'
'No - I wasn't really sure what to say.'
'Not really ... felt disruptive.'
'Yes - but annoyed that suggestions were so rarely followed.·
'Sure; I'm just that kind of guy.'
'No. But that's just me.'
'Sort of- didn't know what was appropriate.'
'Not really- seems unnatural.'
'Yes, when I thought they were appropriate- out of genuine curiosity.'
'Yes, however after listening to the inane suggestions of fellow audience members, I
decided to not share.'
'No - my daughter was acting.'

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

'Yes. Though it gets distracting to think of suggestion and enjoy the show.'
'No - Did not feel there was anything that I could contribute that was better than the
direction of the drama.'
'Yes, but the actors never seemed to listen.'
'Absolutely, the show needed them sometimes, at least as far as lights.'
'Yes, because others were doing it.'
'Yes, it was fun.'
'Yes, but less so as time went on and more of them were followed.'
'Yes, but less so as the suggestions became more and more inane. The actors did a good
job of selectively listening and preventing the play from turning into a farce.'
'Yes - during lighter scenes. No - during more intense scenes, too caught up, didn't
want to distract actors.'

2) Did you identify with any of the characters? Why or why not?
Thursday, 8 pm
'No - too dysfunctional.'
'Elements of them-frustration, [illegible], to succeed desperately, the acting and plot
were effective in this regard with monologue, period of silence, lighting (mood).'
'[blank]'
'No. I'm not particularly sure. I've never been close to anyone in such a situation.'
'Tillie - someone not appreciating my accomplishment.'
'No - they were all too crazy.'
'Haha ... Matilda.'
Friday, 7:30 pm
'Strangely (and perhaps egotistically enough) yes-Matilda. And later Ruth. And in the
future, Beatrice. It was incredible.'
'As a youngest child who grew up feeling out of place in her family, I found myself
identifying with Tillie, but the mother's shame and anxiety was also so palpable and real
that it cut across the boundaries of age and family position.'
'Yes - bits and pieces - we all know people with those characteristics.'
[blank]
'Yes: the play was very true to life; excellent writing. Perhaps an inconclusive ending?'
'No.'

'Tillie- standard [illegible].'
[blank]
'No.

1

'Tilly to some degree for the interest in school.'
Friday, IO pm
'I identified with Tilly- not sure why.'
'Matilda b/c the actions I wanted to happen would have happened through her.'
'No, they seemed more like caricatures than real people.'
'Matilda played her part very well, and exuded emotion.'

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

'Yes, because at certain times everyone feels crazy, inadequate, and a point of derision.'
[blank]
'Yes - with Nanny. Mother had Alzheimer's disease and I could understand the
deterioration in the character.'
'A little with each one. Because we are all cynics, dreamers and just plain ditsy.'
'Identified with concept of [illegible].'
'Yes, the mother and Matilda.'
'No I did not.'
'No, hopefully not.'
'Yes, both Ruth and Tilly.'
'No.'
[blank]
'Yes - Matilda. I felt she understood when saying something will push things over the
edge.'
'No.'
[blank]
'With Matilda. It reminds me of my family.'
'Mostly with Matilda, but this play is pretty far removed from my actual life
experiences.'
'Yes, because they are believable.'
'Maybe w/ Tillie. Underappreciated for my talents by my parents.'
'I did not identify with any of the characters. Maybe if the audience input was responded
to.'
'The one time I identified was when the sisters took each others' side even though they
fought a lot.'
'No I did not.'
Saturday, 8 pm
[blank]
'Not really 'cause they're all sort of crazy.'
'Nope.'
'Yes, Tillie- does anyone care? (not in the context of"does the audience care".).'
'Yes, all 3 of the main characters - they were phenomenally acted.'
'Yes, great acting.'
'Nannie and Tillie were expertly played.'
'Tilly; I can feel her situation. Well acted.'
'Sort of. .. but 1 think that the circumstances in the play were more exaggerated than
those in my life.'
[blank]
[blank]
'Tillie's belief in beauty and unity.'
[blank]
'Somewhat - a little more extreme.'
'Yes, trying to impress your parents is identifiable for many.'

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

'Yes, I could identify the most with the Nanny actor. Very believable and excellent
acting. Very "in character" without any verbalization.'
'They all did a great job. The character of Matilda hit home.'
'No.'
'With Tillie because I'm a nerd.'
'No - this family was very dysfi.mctional.'
'Yes. Tilly made me cry twice.'
'It seemed like the characters were either so corrupt or so withdrawn that it was hard to
relate to them. Then again, they are in extreme circumstances, so that's not surprising.'
'Aspects in all of them. They are characters so none completely but they were so
volatile/[illegible] uninhibited. Superb acting!!!'

3) Did the suggestions better or detract from the drama?
Thursday, 8 pm
'Better.'
'Neither, I think, they were minimal enough.'
'I felt the suggestions offered some comic relief in intense scenes.'
'Better. Definitely. Made it more interesting.'
'Added.'
'Calling out detracted, but I liked when they were enacted.'
'No, it ran very well.'
Friday, 7:30 pm
'Both during the play, but the actors were good at sorting out what to follow. In the end,
for that reason, I snppose it bettered.'
'The suggestions seemed to help heighten the drama and give the play a sense of
improvisation. It called attention to the actors as performers.'
'Some were amusing.'
'Some bettered, most detracted.'
'Bettered it, though I wish there had been more.'
'Detract.' ·
'The "bad" ones detract. The ones adding to the drama are good.'
"Detract.'

'Detract.'
'Didn't really effect it at all.'
-Friday, 10 pm
'By the end I was sick of the suggestions that just tried to be funny.'
'Some bettered it. Since most were humorous or ignored, they detracted.'
'Detract.' It was hard for the dramatic action to really take form.'
'They made it more fuu, and lightened the mood.'
'Neither.'
'Detract.'

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

'Some interesting and others detracted from the intensity of the drama. Some interaction
- seemed as if andience not trying to constructive bnt rather to have fun!'
'Detract. Most of them were attempts at being funny.'
'Most of the suggestions I thought were just stupid. Not taken seriously. Jokes should be
forbidden.'
' 1st act - better. 2"'1 act - detract.'
'I think they detracted a bit since they made you aware this was theatre - not an illusion.'
'Mostly detract. There were some thoughtful ones, but they did not really effect the play
and were pretty useless.'
'Detract.'
'Neutral-the actors didn't accept enough of them for a noticeable effect.'
'Detract mostly, though set suggestions helped (like lighting, music).'
'I think some suggestions would have bettered the drama, but they were not taken. Some
suggestions were distracting.'
'Detract.'
'Better.'

'I felt like very few of the suggestions that were accepted had significant effects either
way, honestly- most of the suggestions ( even serious ones) that would have significant
effects were ignored.'
'Both.'
'They barely changed the drama at all. Nothing significant was change.'
'Usually detract- but could better in theory.'
'Definitely detract.'
'The actors weren't responsive enough.'
'It depended on if they were serious or not.'

'I think it bettered the drama.'
Saturday, 8 pm
'Detracted.'
'Detract from the drama.'
'Detract from the drama, esp. the jokes that were NOT pertinent to see a great play.'
'Actors did a good job but I think the script was too concrete for suggestions.'
'I thought they detracted, but it my be because I !mew an actor and was thinking of the
participation more as taking away from the actors and their story than as a dialogue.'
'It detracted, tho it offered comic relief.'
'Detracted in the sense that no great risks were taken - take more 1'
'It didn't seem like any of them were actually followed. But all in all I'd say it did not
add.'
'They were minimally influential. Actually, I'd recommend that the actors follow them
more often - otherwise they're useless.'
'Detract - perhaps better for comedy.'
'Detract - it would have been slightly more fighting [illegible] less a dramatic piece.'
'Detract.'
'Detract!'

'They relieved the tense plot.'
'I believe it detracted, but the phone suggestion at the end was perfect.'

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

'Brought audience "'in" more.'
'Good, except for the somewhat excessive change in lighting requests.'
'They would have [illegible] if the actors took the suggestions.'
'Mostly better, but some random tech suggestions were dumb.'
'Better - it sucked that no one did anything.'
'Detract - the cast did not seem willing enough to listen or get out of their comfort zones
and so there was no real sense of having a voice or control so I thought, what is the point,
it just lets you know you don't count.'
'I felt that the idea added to the drama, but in practice I'm not so sure. Maybe with a
different audience.'
'Detract.'

4) How did the "vocal audience" shape your experience?

Thursday, 8 pm
'Made the play more interesting - I wasn't expecting it.'
'Did feel more "allowed" to express opinion about progress of the performance.'
'It made an otherwise serious, intense drama comical in some instances.'
'More fun more inviting.'
'Some made some silly comments, but others were very intriguing.'
'Distracting.'
'It made it much more enjoyable and interactive.'
Friday, 7:30 pm
'I felt that if I had wanted to play the director role I would have, and it changed my
experience in that there was simply nothing (about voices, projectors, lighting - nothing)
that I wanted to change, so I realized how well directed it was. Thank you for an amazing
production.'
'The vocal audience made me acutely aware of our need for comic relief and the way it
made the poignant moments in the play that much more meaningful. I was also struck by
how much we all felt angry and wanted to intervene and felt caught by our inability to
help the family.'
'Encouraged me to stay interested.'
'It added in general, event the bad suggestions at least help get passed the slow and tense
parts.'
'It was a neat option to have, but I didn't notice as much because not many people
spoke.'
'They made it funny.'
'It was new and fresh.'
'I was confused about it.'
'Did not help.'
'Didn't really effect it.'
Friday, 10 pm
'It made the show more fun, just listening to the voices that weren't onstage.'

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

'It was easier to pay attention to the play realizing there's an entire gronp with yon. Also,
good to see what others pay attention to.'
'It destroyed all of the beanty and emotion.'
[blank]
'It added some relief to a very serious performance.'
[blank]
'Kept my interest throughout- Even when lulls in the script (i.e. Papa and the horses,
etc.).'
'Made a good play with great actors into an average one with people shouting.'
'It was interesting. But sometimes I was irritated with some of the suggestions. Felt like
telling them to shut up.'
'Felt more involved.'
'Interesting experiment -worth the$.'
'Well, it was the first time I was part of a vocal audience, so the concept itself was
interesting. But overall, the drama would have been more effective without the
suggestions. Maybe a vocal audience would be more appropriate in a comical play.'
'Not much.'
'I liked it.'
'It made a depressing drama humorous. The suggestions were funny for the most part.'
'It was definitely experimental, but I think it could be even more so.'
'They made me feel uncomfortable by using humor to alleviate the tension.'
'It was fun, if a little distracting at times.'
'Hmm ... I don't think people were taking it seriously enough. Too many obnoxious
suggestions - not enough people thinking seriously about what might improve the
interestingness of the play.'
'Varied my opinions - made it interesting.'
'It was more funny than experimental.'
'Um ... I don't' know, a few people said some stupid things.'
'It was funny but not productive. The actors were too focused/nervous to take most oftl1e
suggestions, and most of the suggestions were purely for humor. I did not find this
experiment successful!'
[blank]
'Sometimes distracting, but more [illegible] to feel I had power.'
'It was a novel experience.'

Saturday, 8 pm
'Broke the mood the author was trying to create - and my relationship with the
characters.'
'I didn't really like it.'
'It turned a fantastic play into just a good one.'
'Frustration - due to stupid comments - but I guess you may want the audience to be
frustrated.'
'I think I would have preferred this in a comedy setting - here, it seemed like many
comments were meant to impress each other, and most couldn't be taken. But, a really
interesting idea!'
[blank]

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

'Show was great, but buy more iuto the premise and let the show change.'
'It was more comedic than anything- did not seem like the actors really paid attention to

any. The play did not seem suited to it.'
'It was pretty interesting. 1 sometimes felt like commenting on other people's comments.'
'Illustrated the separation btw the comic and tragic.'
'Made be frustrated b/c of the inappropriateness of some comments.'
'I thought it took away from the written dialogue of the script and distracted the audience
from the emotional content of the scenes.'
'I thought that the audience was too "immature" to have the ability to shout out things. It
lost the connection I felt with certain characteristics/situation due to suggestions like "It's
HammerTime.m
'Both positive and negative. Neg - distracted from the story and effect. Pos - also
relieved some of the tension.'
'I felt like I was part of a fight - [illegible] community but it got a bit distracting.'
'Very interesting - more so than other plays of this intensity.'
'It was certainly unique. Although sometimes suggestions seemed to be shouted out at
inappropriate times.'
[blank]
'Made the performance easier to share and enjoy.'
'It made it so much more fun. It's every audience member's dream to shout at the play.'
[blank]
'It definitely made the play more exciting. I'd like to see something similar again in the
future.'
'Certainly fun at points and freeing to vocalize what I won't/don't want to happen but
[illegible] this mostly distracted from the excellent performance.'

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

APPENDIX I
Suggestion Taxonomy
Influence - exert influence, a sort of "testing of the waters"
"Tum the lights on." (F30)
"Can you play 'Staying Alive?' In the background9 " (FI0)
Recitation - recite previous behavior
"Be excited, Beatrice [in reference to another phone call to Mr. Goodman]." (R8)
Consistent - action, in-line with previous behavior
"Smack Tillie on the head." (S8)
"Go get the chloroform." (S8)
Divergent - action, regardless of previous behavior
"Show us your boobs." (F30)
"Ask him [Mr. Goodman] on a date." (F30)
"[Nanny,] Throw the honey at Beatrice." (S8)
Echo - one spectator malces the same suggestion as another, separate spectator
"Bury it [the towel] anyway."/ "Bury it now." (S8)
Opposition - direct opposition to a character's previous statement or action
"Don't watch." (F30)
"Bury it anyway." (S8)
'The Gun Scenario' - pressure actors to deliver something which has been referred to
previously
"Explain who Mr. Mayo is." (S8)
Technical - alter technical aspects to I) exert influence, 2) re-introduce realism, or 3)
improve reception/perception
"Light the scene change." (F30)
"Bring back the rain." (S8)
"Turn the lights back on." (S8)
Character Inclusion - introduce character into new scene
"Ruth, come on in." (FI0)
"Tillie, come listen to this." (S8)
Material Alteration - something has changed on the set
"The couch is smoking." (F30)
"Somebody make the easy chair point the other way." (FIO)

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Environmental Alteration - change in the environment
"Suddenly it's very hot in the room." (Fl 0)
Circnmstantial - related to the circumstance the character is in
"Slur your words." (F30)
Should Do - something the character should do in a given circumstance, based upon
cultural understanding of human relations
"Tillie, move closer to Ruth." (S8)
Returnative Behavior - attempt to move character into a more comfortable subset of
actions-behaviors
"Stop I [reaction to Beatrice throwing boxes off the stairs]" (F30)
Inner State - action they believe reflects the character's inner state
"Red spotlight on Beatrice." (Fl 0)
"Red spot on Ruth." (S8)
Previous Aesthetic - based in previous aesthetic experience, whether theatrical or filmic,
as well as general cultural artistic tropes/conventions
"Have a fit of rage. Destroy stuff." (S8)
"Slow-motion." (S8)
"Spotlight on the cage." (S8)
Awareness - acknowledges or plays off of the awareness of the actor, or directly
addresses the actor's performance
"Try projecting." (S8)
"Lower your voice." (FlO)
Process - alter part of the theatrical process itself
"Light the scene change." (FIO)
"Have the board ops switch boards." (FlO)
Direct Address - directly addresses the experiment
"You're not taking any of our suggestions." (F30)
"Be more experimental." (Fl 0)
Intertextnal - based on a phrase, object, or action that is highly intertextual, i.e. has
several well-known associations
"Tell scary stories." (S8)
"Make shadow puppets on the back wall." (FlO)
"Do a kick-line." (S8)

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Extrapolation - based in observed behaviors, posits an alteration in keeping with that
behavior but based not on that behavior, but rather upon phenomena outside the realm
of the play
"Ruth, tell her you're pregnant." (RS)
Aesthetic - contributes to the representation itself, whether positively or negatively
"Switch roles." (SS)
"Can everyone speak in a Russian accent?" (SS)
Fictional Confined - suggestion is based solely on information a character has,
eliminating dramatic irony
"Honk the horn again." (F30)
Meta-suggestion - used aesthetically, based on the combination of audience involvement
and the play
"Ruth, come stand in the aisle and do this scene." (SS)
Response to another spectator's suggestion
Confirmation/Approval
"Light the scene change."/ "Come on." (SS)
Negation/Disapproval
"Change the music." "No." (F30)
Shock
"Boil the rabbit." "Jesus." (F30)
Expansion
"Play a gunshot."/ "Play some drive-by music." (RS)
Humor peers
Experiential humor - based on personal, college experiences
"Chug it. Chug it." (RS)
Meta-humor - mocks the structure and/or action of the experiment itself
"Peter, poop on Ruth.'' (SS)
"Applause ... End applause." (F30)
Outside Humor - refers to participants in the production and depends upon a
previous knowledge of those individuals
''Laird, ca11 the show in Spanish." (Fl0)
"Tell her about Equus." (SS)
"Sing 'West Side Story.'" (SS)

Robert Caleb Green

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Impossibility- inherently cannot be enacted
"Bring the puppet from Saw on stage." (RS)
"Make the helicopter land in the theater." (FIO)
Character humor - based in the mockery of a character or her situation
"Throw the towel at the old woman." (RS)
Literalism
"Drop dead." (F30)

Senior Thesis, Anthropology

Robert Caleb Green

APPENDIXJ
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
[NOTE: Materials are arranged chronologically. 17,ey can be obtained with permission
from the University ofPennsylvania Department ofAnthropology.]
AA : Gamma Rays Audition Sheet, the sheet actors filled out in auditioning for the play
BB : Brief Survey oflntercultural Performance, placed outside of auditions for actors to
examine; also, each actor cast in the production was given a copy; it guided our
discussions of performance and theatre
CC : Outline for First Rehearsal, my outline which exemplifies our approach in many
ways
DD : General Info Sheet, handed out at first production meeting
EE : Workshop Video, the film viewed in workshop, comprised of clips from several
films; the purpose of the video was first to provide examples of the quality of art we
were attempting the and means of achieving it, and second to illustrate world
performance traditions and rituals
FF : Gamma Rays Teaser, two teasers which sparked a heated controversy between
myself and the iNtuitons board; it is tradition with that group to post a "teaser"
around campus several weeks before the performance; they wanted to post the picture
of the rabbit; I objected, and was supported by Laird, Sloan, and Jenny; they allowed
me to make my own (the second teaser included), but rejected it on the basis that it
looked "cheap" because it was hand-drawn; the dispute continued, with no agreement
in sight, so the teaser was aborted; I include it because it reflects the diverse
perspectives on the play between myself and the iNtuitons board
GG : Gamma Rays Safety Meeting Sheet, handed out at the safety meeting prior to "tech
week
HH : Gamma Rays Poster, posted around campus
II : Gamma Rays Flyer, handed out by students on Locust Walk
JJ : Gamma Rays Program
1

'

