Anthropology Senior Theses

University of Pennsylvania

ScholarlyCommons
Department of Anthropology

Spring 2007

Printing Fuck: Resistance and Commodification at an Urban Alt
Weekly
Andrew L. Pederson
University of Pennsylvania

Follow this and additional works at: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses

Q

Part of the Anthropology Commons

Recommended Citation
Pederson, Andrew L., "Printing Fuck: Resistance and Commodification at an Urban Alt Weekly" (2007).
Anthropology Senior Theses. Paper 83.

This paper is posted at ScholarlyCommons. https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/83
For more information, please contact repository@pobox.upenn.edu.

Printing Fuck: Resistance and Commodification at an Urban Alt Weekly
Disciplines
Anthropology

This thesis or dissertation is available at ScholarlyCommons: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/83

PRINTING FUCK: RESISTANCE AND COMMODIFICATION AT AN URBAN ALT
WEEKLY
By
Andrew L. Pederson
In
Anthropology
Submitted to the
Department of Anthropology
University of Pennsylvania
Thesis Advisor: Dr. John Jackson
2007

Abstract

Interest in mass media is increasing as anthropologists not only begin to regard
mass media as salient features in their communities of study, but also as researchers
begin to examine forms of media themselves as social sites of meaning creation. While
older theoretical models tend to view mass media as a 'top down' process which can be
used to manipulate or mislead passive receivers, empirical data and newer observations
illustrate that mass media are active components of a dynamic social and cultural
landscape. Building on this perspective, this study examines the social site ofproduction
of a large circulation urban alternative weekly publication. Using a broad based
literature review as well as long term participant observation, this study examines the
paper's institutional identity as 'alternative' as well its historical relations to
underground newspapers and subsequent development into a freely distributed vehicle
for advertising. This study ends with a discussion of the implications of the increasing
commoditization of cultural production in contemporary society.

2

Table of Contents
Introduction .......................................................................................................................... 4
Literature Review ................................................................................................................. 8
Genesis of 'Alt' .................................................................................................................. 14
Alt Weeklies in Historical Perspective .............................................................................. 23
Ethnographic Perspectives at the Weekly ......................................................................... .31
Political. ................................................................................................................. 32
People and Hierarchy ................................................................................. 32
Readership in the Minds of the Editors ...................................................... 35
Binary Antagonisms .................................................................................. .38
Aesthetic ................................................................................................................ 41
Quantitative ........................................................................................................... .44
Discussion .......................................................................................................................... 46
Conclusion ......................................................................................................................... 54
References .......................................................................................................................... 57
Table ofFigures ................................................................................................................. 62

3

All the reporters in the world working all the hours of the day could not witness all the
happenings of the world.
-Walter Lippman
Introduction
Sitting across from me in the booth, Tim sipped at his tea while I asked him about
PW's readership demographics. "Media Audit," Tim said without hesitation, "is way
fucked up." A minute ago, Tim had listed off the characteristics of the "average" PW
reader as was related to him by the subcontractor that the publisher paid upwards of
$30,000 per year to collect demographic data: white, young, affluent and urban. Tim
didn't doubt that young white affluent citizens read the paper, but he saw a large gap
between the data that the expensive demographic research company, Media Audit,
provided and what he considered to be PW' s identity within the Philadelphia media
market. After all, in a town as racially diverse as Philadelphia, could a paper really
survive without having "something for everybody?"
Elaborating a bit, Tim recalled that "on occasion" the audit company had "gone
out of their way to point out that covers featuring African Americans don't have the same
pick up rate as other covers." As a free urban "alternative weekly" (alt weekly), PW
depends on a high pick up rate to ensure that it is reaching a demographic that advertisers
will pay to communicate with. Without establishing a discrete readership, then, it is
impossible to brand the paper and sell advertising. "For the record," Tim continued,
referring to the subcontractor's advice, "I think that's horseshit."
Tim started out as a magazine journalist, but found his way to PW just as it was
undergoing a dramatic renovation from an oddball community paper, the Welcomat, to
the established and newly resurgent alt weekly format that had already proved successful

4

in other markets. The changes were enacted over the course of a "chaotic" year of
massive turnover, dramatic spikes in circulation and some bitter words with former staff.
In the end, PW became one of two vibrant "alt weekly" style publications in the city,
featuring journalistic news stories, human interest features, music, entertainment and
extensive local listings for everything from concerts to massage parlors.
PW combines left leaning journalism with an extensive knowledge of local events
to provide a Philadelphia-centric hub of activity in a form that is both colorful and edgy.
Through its various incarnations, PW has over 30 years of history, and in the currently
tumultuous media landscape of Philadelphia, has been a profitable and steadily growing
institution. This contrasts sharply with the widely publicized financial and circulatory
malaise at formerly dominant daily print bastions such as the venerable broadsheet The
Philadelphia Inquirer and the tabloid The Daily News.

However, as a social site of meaning creation, PW poses a unique set of questions
which can be multiply approached for a holistic view of its peculiar niche.
Chronologically, one can ask how its historically specific form originated and flourished,
and what economic conditions led to its formation at a given moment in time. As a
social site of production, PW also presents a challenging productive and aesthetic
dynamic, encapsulated in the set of practices which it uses to create and project its
identity as an "Alt" publication. All of these issues can be drawn into a larger discussion
of the causal structure of mass media in contemporary society, and approaching these
questions from the bottom up, via long term participant observation and personal
interviews, offers an excellent opportunity to evaluate certain conceptions of mass media
from a different standpoint.

5

This project seeks to understand both the historical depth of PW as well as the
current dynamics which continue to shape the social conditions of production. As Tim's
apprehension about the media research sub contractor demonstrates, though the Weekly
has developed into and continues to be a profitable publication which depends on a well
developed, if abstract, advertising demographic, the tension between economic
imperatives and editorial "independence" remains conspicuously unresolved. How did
PW come to exist in its current format and why? Who produces PW, and what
ideological underpinnings inform their decisions? How does PW fit into a broader media
landscape? What can one infer about broader processes of institutionalized meaning
making from the particular, local example of PW?
This study combines a year of participant observation with a literature based
analysis of both 'Alternative' publications as a historical phenomenon as well as issues of
power and hegemony which any discussion of media production invariably entails. From
approximately June 2006 to May 2007, I was an editorial intern at the publication, during
which time I fact-checked articles, transcribed interviews, did some limited research and
updated concert listings on a MySpace page. As time wore on, I successfully submitted
several news features for publication and had the opportunity to work with both a senior
staff writer and a managing editor. As part oftbe project, I attended weekly staff
meetings during which I took notes on the discussions and in addition conducted formal
interviews with the majority of the editorial staff.
This study begins with a broad review of some major developments in mass
media theory which contributed to the author's understanding of the issues at stake and
moves quickly into an overview of the available anthropological materials dealing with

6

media ethnography as well as the small number of texts which deal directly with
alternative newspapers.
The second section reviews the academic debate surrounding the definition of
'alternative' versus the 'mainstream' publications. Although the notion of the
'mainstream' is not new, no stable definition separating it from its 'alternative'
counterpart has yet been articulated. Nor has any one theorist been able to capture the
precise nature of 'alt' publications and how they differ from 'popular' or 'mainstream'
products. By attempting to synthesize an abstract model of the 'alternative' this author
hopes to be able to more effectively analyze a publication that prominently self identifies
as an 'alternative' weekly.
The third section discusses the development of alternative newspapers, focusing
on the genesis of a particular format, the "alt weekly," which emerged at a distinct
historical juncture as the result of a unique confluence of factors. The now popular and
widely reproduced "alt weekly" format emerged at a very particular moment in history
from a number of identifiable forerunners. Of primary importance was the economic
failure of the large number of"underground" publications of the late sixties and early
seventies as well as a shift into free distribution and a business model based on
advertising revenue rather than subscription.
The fourth section is based primarily on my ethnographic observations and
focuses on the peculiar practices of PW as an alt-weekly. Of particular interest are the
development of the alt-weekly format as a vehicle for advertising and the distinct
strategies of resistance that the editorial staff employs to reinforce its sense of
independence from the capitalistic advertising component. Throughout all stages of

7

production, the staff relies on a diverse range of ideas to reinforce the paper's
"alternative" identity despite the fact that many critics with a background in underground
publications consider the format to be, generally, a form of "selling out" to capitalist
pressures and nothing more than a niche marketing strategy.
I will close the paper with an extensive discussion of the implications of
increasing commoditization and strategies of demographically based marketing on the
'alternative' identity of the alt weekly. While many commentators would be quick to
condemn this process as a form of 'selling out' to corporate practice and capitalist
dogma, I believe it is possible to show that general theories of media 'decline' and
associated audience manipulation fail to take into account both the diversity of the media
landscape as well as the astounding variability of personal subjectivity and individual
interpretation of texts. In all sections, I rely on personal observations made over the
course of my field work as well as a great deal of detail which was drawn from personal
discussions with the staff.
Literature Review
Mass media research has been pursued across a wide range of social science and
humanistic domains for much of the past century, making any review of the relevant
literature necessarily constrained. However, media studies have been broadly influenced
by many of the themes first articulated in the mid 20th century by cultural critics within
the Frankfurt school. In their widely influential views, Adorno and Horkheimer theorized
a "culture industry" which produced meanings according to a F ordist framework of mass
production, thereby creating what they famously termed a "mass culture" ( 1974: 12)
The "culture industry" of Adorno and Horkheimer (Adorno 1974) emphasized the
degrading quality of cultural production, embodied in the collapsing hierarchy separating
8

'high' art from 'low' and increasing commoditization and industrialization of media
production. Their mechanistic views of media production suppose an ordered apparatus
which "intentionally integrates its consumers from above" while simultaneously "forces
together the spheres of high and low art, separated for thousands of years" (12). As a
result, "It impedes the development of autonomous, independent individuals who judge
and decide consciously for themselves," individuals who are the "precondition for a
democratic society" (19).
As Debra Spitulnik (1993:295) noted in her review of the Anthropologic literature
of mass media, this "dominant model" of the "mass communication process"
distinguished the three phases of production, transmission and reception from each other
and isolated each one as an isolated site of study. This model has long been accepted as
the basis for the study of mass media and still retains a strong influence today. Indeed,
Eric Louw (2001 :50) depends expressly on this model to base his hypotheses, and one
can easily find the same linear chain of causality and pessimistic attitude towards recent
media developments among media critics such as Bourdieu 1998, Chomsky 1988, Fenton
2005, Anderson 2004 and Bagdikian 1997, among numerous others.
Furthermore, media critics, the Frankfurt School pessimists included, almost
universally ignore observations made by earlier interested actors within the rapidly
growing mass media network at the beginning of the 20 th century. Chief among these
writers is the widely cited Walter Lippman, who, in his classic text Public Opinion
(1922), provides a description and evaluation of the news industry that is both practically
attentive to detail and mindful of the mass media's place within a larger social and

9

cultural structure. Such a view is obviously contrary to the monolithic conception of the
power of mass media that nonetheless superseded more moderate positions.
Recently, however, Brian McNair (2006) has mounted a persuasive critique of
preceding theoretical approaches, advocating instead a move away from what he refers to
as the "control paradigm" which is "that set of critical approaches which views capitalist
culture, and journalism in particular, as a monstrous apparatus bearing down on passive
populations" and "cultural pessimism" which "asserts a process of backward evolution in
capitalist culture [ ... ] towards those [media outputs] defined as debased, vulgarized and
dangerous" (2006:vii-viii). Rather, by importing a neutral framework from the 'chaos
theory' of the natural sciences, McNair supposes a "contemporary communication
environment in which, as in nature, chaos creates as well as destroys, generating in the
process enhanced possibilities for progressive cultural, political and social evolution, as
well as trends towards social entropy and disorder" (2006:xii). Indeed, McNair's
aesthetically and morally neutral approach succeeds in avoiding much of the confusion
and alarmism of other media critiques and is able to acknowledge variation and
ambiguity in many places where the binary system of "good" media versus "bad" media
inevitably breaks down.
To flesh out this transition, it is worth quoting McNair at some length:
The control paradigm stresses the importance of structure, stasis and hierarchy in
the maintenance of an unjust social order. It is premised on economic
determinacy, whereby ruling elites are presumed to be able to extend their control
of economic resources to control of the cultural apparatuses of media, including
the mans of propaganda and public relations, leading to planned and predictable
outcomes such as pro-elite media bias, dominant ideology, even 'brainwashing'.
These outputs are then implicated in the maintenance of ideological control in the
interests of dominant groups, whether these have been defined in terms of class,
gender, ethnicity or some other criteria of stratification. [ ... ]

10

By contrast, the chaos paradigm acknowledges the desire for control on the part
of elites, while suggesting that the performance, or exercise of control, is
increasingly interrupted and disrupted by unpredictable eruptions and bifurcations
arising from the impact of economic, political, ideological and technological
factors on communication processes. These lead to unplanned outcomes in media
content-dissent from elite accounts of evens rather than dominant ideology or
bias; ideological competition rather than hegemony; increased volatility of news
agendas; and this routinely, rather than exceptionally (2006:3-4).
As we shall see, McNair's fresh perspective has some merit in attempting to understand
the nature of' alternative' publications and their place inside the greater media landscape.
Nearly half a century after their formulation, then, the unempirical and largely
unqualified 1 assumptions of the Frankfurt school's cultural pessimism are only beginning
to be evaluated and questioned. Although many questions of power relations and textual
causality as they relate to the "total social fact" (Spitulnik 1993:293) of mass media in
'modern' societies can largely be traced to the alarmist tone of the Frankfurt School, the
current theoretical environment is becoming considerably more diverse, in Anthropology
as much as in other fields.
A recent wave of media ethnographers brings a bottom-up ethnographical
methodology to media studies and is actively reconsidering former conceptions of media
causality. This includes a reevaluation of the links between the social spaces of
production and consumption, the various social actors in each and the textual objects
themselves. Indeed, Spitulnik (1993 :296) noted the increasing focus on "the interpretive
practices of media audiences" as a counterweight to previously unbalanced attention to
processes of hegemonic media production. While Spitulnik lamented in 1993 that there
was as yet "no anthropology of media" (1993 :293), nine years later Ginsburg, Larkin and

1

Adorno admits without dampening his fervor for the emptiness of the culture industry that, "thorough
research has not, for the time being, produced an airtight case proving the regressive effects of particular
products of the culture industry" (1974:18)

11

Abu-Lughod (2002) were able to identify a burgeoning subfield in Anthropology which
was opening new doors in media studies with ethnographic approaches which were both
multi-site and holistic.
Of particular interest to anthropologists was the growing significance of mass
media within the societies they were studying, and the discipline's interest in mass media
appropriately grew from a global perspective on transnational media flow and mass
media's role in individual and community identity formation, especially the development
and distribution of 'national' consciousness. Two important theorists in this regard were
Benedict Anderson 1983 and Jurgen Habermas 1989, who enriched Anthropology's
theoretical framework for comprehending informational flows and senses of identity as
they relate to cultural formation and change (Ginsburg 2002:3-5).
In addition to more traditionally anthropologic studies of mass media in nonwestern societies, a small number of researchers have focused their efforts on fusing
together the formerly separate phases of production, text and consumption into holistic
studies of the social space of media forms. As Ginsberg and her colleagues helpfully
point out, work by Domfield 2002, Mandel 2002, Davila 2002 and Ganti 2002 highlights
cultural interests in the sphere of production of television, advertising and film,
respectively. More importantly, this research destabilizes the boundary between
production and reception by outlining the intertwined roles of audience and producer,
ever if the former remains an abstraction. As Dornfield (2002) concluded in his study of
a television documentary:
The forms of mediation that result in the production of a television program are
socially and historically situated in relation to other public cultural forms. In this
sense, television is not just a media form but a format through which complex acts
of cultural mediation take place[ ... ] (2002:261).

12

It is not difficult to think of other forms of mass media along similar lines. If the
production of a television program entails such a detailed web of social relations, would
we not expect to find a similar network at a newspaper or radio show?
Continuing a bit further into the "final boundary," a very small number of
researchers have sought to internally document and understand the "social worlds of
media institutions where 'dominant ideologies' are produced" (Ginsburg et al 2002:17).
These works tend to focus on the 'culture' of news production, primarily in television and
broadcast journalism (Gitlin 1983, Pedelty 1995, Silverstone 1985 cf Ginsberg), but there
are also some studies which directly address political economy in the newsroom,
journalistic attitudes and internal conceptions of 'news' and 'democracy': Gibbs 2003,
Min 2004, Harcup 2005 and Kunelius 2006.
In brief, anthropologic literature on mass media is increasing, particularly in the
areas where it intersects with national identity and marginalized indigenous forms in nonwestern societies, with an emphasis on broadcast media such as television and film. To a
lesser extent, print media has been examined in a similar way, although anthropologic
studies of newspapers seem to be rare or nonexistent. To the author's knowledge,
ethnographic accounts of the production of alternative newspapers are extraordinarily
limited. To date, Gibbs 2003 and Min 2004 appear to be the only studies which directly
address the social sphere of production of printed news media with a more or less
anthropological methodology.
As Spitulnik commented: "The crucial challenge in studying these alternative
media forms [ ... ] is to situate their production, use, interpretation and circulation within
the large contexts of available media form" (I 993 :306).

13

To that effect, scholarly

attention to "alternative" media in contemporary 'modern' societies is increasing,
although there still remains no solid consensus on what constitutes an "alternative" or
even "mainstream publication. If journalism is beginning to be addressed as a site of
cultural and social production, it is still plain that the work of observing and evaluating
contemporary mass media forms is in its early stages.
This study proceeds from this juncture, wherein an incredible diversification of
media production and consumption practices is a given within an equally diverse and
fragmented sphere of exchange. Following McNair's (2006) critique of formerly
dominant theoretical forms, this paper will eschew Habermasian and qualitative
terminology wherever possible, situating its findings instead around the assumption that
in a media environment as chaotic as McNair (2006) describes, nothing must be taken as
given, and the only sure way to construct a stable or semi-accurate portrait is from the
ground up.
Genesis of' Alt'
Discussing alternative forms of media immediately becomes a difficult exercise in
semantics, as there is no formal consensus on the boundaries between what qualifies as
"alternative" or "mainstream" (Harcup 2005:361 ). Nor is there any other reliable
taxonomy which allows us to parse up and structurally comprehend contemporary news
media. Instead we are presented with what Campbell (2004) has termed "broad-brush
collective terms for a disparate body of practices" (qtd. in Harcup 2005:361). Before
discussing attitudes at the weekly, therefore, it is necessary to attempt to disentangle
some of the confusion and construct a suitable picture by which we can judge a
publication to be a "popular alt weekly," an infinitely more problematic term than it

14

would seem. How can we understand the lines between "alternative" and "mainstream"
journalism? Similarly, what is "popular" journalism and how does it relate to either or
both "alternative" and/or "mainstream" publications? Is it possible for an "alternative"
publication to be "popular?"
As Henrik Orne bring and Anna Maria Jonsson (2004:285) have pointed out,
Nancy Fraser's (1992) critique ofHabermas' 1989 Structural Transformations of the
Public Sphere underlines the fact that the media environment of complex societies is a
variegated and complicated exchange between many different interested parties,
especially in the case of minority or "subaltern" groups. Thus, while it may be true that,
in a modern democracy, public sphere access and exchange is essential, it may exist
socially across many different modalities and communities, both imaginary and concrete.
Although a discussion of the evolution of the public sphere entails many salient
issues, the topic is far too dense to approach in this section. Rather, over the course of
their fascinating appraisal of tabloid newspapers as the "journalistic other" (2004:284),
Orne bring and Jonsson arrive at a concise, if ad hoc, distinction between the "mainstream
mediated public sphere consisting perhaps of the television and radio news and
commentary shows and the daily newspapers that have the largest audience and/or are
generally considered most important [ ... ]" and "one or several alternative public spheres,
where different people debate different issues in different ways" (2004:285), taken to
mean "criticism and questioning of the political, economic and cultural elites and the
societal status quo[ ... ]" (2004:287). While one is immediately tempted to reject this
explanation as circular logic, since 'alternative' can only be negatively defined as that

15

which is 'not mainstream,' viewing this separation as a social dynamic rather than a
structural fact makes some sense.
For Ornebring and Jonsson (2004), this distinction is a set of binary oppositions,
with morally charged markers delimited by the elite and established faction, which works
in tandem to constitute an opposing dynamic between two social groups. Their example
comes from the 19th century rise of 'popular' tabloid newspapers in England and in the
U.S., which often garnered significant criticism from established broadsheets, which
accused the papers of foisting all manner of sensationalized pap on an unsuspecting
public. However, Ornebring and Jonsson find that this criticism is often unfounded, more
the result of an elite group protecting its own interests:
The journalistic other of tabloid journalism has appeared throughout the history of
journalism, and [ ... ] elements and aspects of journalism defined as "bad" in its
own time in many cases did a better job ( or at least a good a job) in serving the
public good than "respectable" journalism (2004:284).
As a result, in place of a qualitative, binary description of media forms which
relies on classifying the nature of the texts produced, Ornebring and Jonsson usefully
propose evaluating publications based on the social motivations of the actors involved.
They classify the characteristics of an alternative sphere into four types: spatial ("takes
place somewhere else"), social ("other participants than those normally dominating
media discourse"), topical ("other issues than those commonly debated in the
mainstream") and modal ("other ways" or forms of debating and discussing common
issues) (2004:286). All of these categories rely on a conscious social opposition in
relation to a fixed, possibly abstracted, other, and we can see that much of what might
constitute an 'alternative' publication would be no more than a self-definition as such.
Such an inclusive definition immediately obscures any view of the mass media that

16

assumes production can be broken down into two opposing halves, one mainstream and
one alternative.
While Chris Atton's (1999b) study of alternative media accepted the idea that it is
possible for the alternative press to be conceived of in Habermasian terms as an
"alternative public sphere," (1999b:54) where publications, as Tony Harcup (2005:361)
observes, "frequently define themselves as existing in opposition to mainstream media"
in order to "serve publics who in many cases are alienated from mainstream media,"
recent work has destabilized this boundary. Harcup (2005) has identified many
'mainstream' journalists with a background in the 'alternative' press and is skeptical
about any sharp boundaries which might cast the alternative/mainstream question in what
Rodriguez (2001) has referred to as "rigid categories of power and binary conceptions of
domination and subordination" (qtd. in Harcup 2005: 370).
Harcup (2005) ultimately concludes that there is some possible "crossover of
ideas, content, style, and, not least, people between what may be termed the alternative
and what may be termed the mainstream[ ... ]." Rather, Harcup indicates the "existence of
what might be termed a continuum, with people, ideas and practices moving along this
continuum, in both directions" (2005 :370). If indeed the fixed boundaries between
'alternative' and 'mainstream' publications are breaking down, as Harcup's work
indicates, ordering the media landscape according to Ornebring and Jonsson's (2004)
criteria becomes extremely difficult, since the social actors at alternative publications,
which should be separated and oppositional, are in some cases interchangeable.
This is as much true for distinctions between 'kinds' of news as it is for the people
and organizations which produce them. In his empirical evaluation of tabloid broadcast

17

journalism and its effects on the political knowledge of recipients, Matthew Baum (2002)
grapples with a similar ambiguity produced by the multiple definition of' soft' news as a
"residual category for all news that is not 'hard,"' "a particular vocabulary," or a "set of
story characteristics" (2002:92). Ultimately, Baum accepts an "imprecise" inventory of
characteristics to delineate 'soft' news from 'hard' news, but remarks that the "difference
between soft and hard news is one of degree rather than kind" (2002:92). If there is little
or no essential difference between 'kinds' of news, then, the social and cultural factors
which impact news production and reception become ever more relevant.
We should recall at this point the principal complaint articulated by the Frankfurt
School pessimists, that media production is an ordered apparatus which "intentionally
integrates its consumers from above" while it simultaneously "forces together the spheres
of high and low art, separated for thousands of years" (Adorno 1974:12). This media
criticism, based as it is on black and white judgments of quality and an indemonstrable
but assumed decline, however, quickly shows itself to be problematic in the face of direct
observations. Ifwe accept Harcup's (2005) claims that the boundary between
'alternative' and 'mainstream' publications is at best porous, and evidence from Baum's
(2002) content-based analysis that there is a similar ambiguity between 'soft' and 'hard'
news content, it becomes obvious that we must re-examine the framework we employ to
describe the cultural and social products of journalism.
Further complicating matters is a significant overlap between so called 'popular'
media and what can be considering 'alternative.' From the outset one would assume that
a 'popular' form of media would be more aligned with the 'mainstream,' but this is not
necessarily the case. Citing Raymond Williams 1976, Martin Conboy (2007) remarks

18

that there are three "areas of conflict" which obscure the definition of 'popular' cultural
products. The term can be seen:
first, politically as denoting culture created from the point of view of the people
rather than those seeking power over them; second, it can be seen as inferior to
the quality of elite or high cultural products and practices; third, it can mean wellliked by many people (2007:1-2).
As Conboy (2007) notes, Colin Sparks (2000) synthesized this description into the
"political, the aesthetic and the quantitative aspects of the popular" (Conboy 2007:2).
Returning to the four part typology enumerated by Ornebring and Jonsson (2004) above,
we can see some interesting parallels. The spatial, social, topical and modal features of
the "alternative" can be un-problematically absorbed by the first two elements proposed
by Sparks (2000), or vice-versa. Politically, actors set themselves apart in "alternative"
spaces with "alternative" actors while aesthetically choosing to cover "alternative"
subjects in "alternative" modalities. What is left is the quantitative dimension of how
many people comprise the actual or imagined readership, which, when compared to the
depth of the other categories is more a superficial marker of obscurity than otherness.
The number of readers, after all, is a thin criterion by which to separate 'popular'
publications from 'alternative' ones.
Additionally, while at first glance the "popular" journalism of the tabloids would
seem to be the antithesis of the anti-mainstream "alternative" press, both self-define via a
process of differentiation from a fixed other. In the case of "popular" publications, it is
their "elite" counterparts which produce the tension between, in Conboy's terms, "quality
and tabloid," (2007: 1). In the case of "alternative" publications, as we have already seen,
their 'alternative-ness' is constructed largely in their positioning of themselves in
opposition to what is perceived to be 'mainstream.'

19

Hence, to say that a publication is at once "alternative" and "popular" is
somewhat redundant, as "alternative" seems to overlap all the implied aspects of
"popular," save for the quantifiable numbers of readership, and there is no reason to think
that the inverse might not also be true. That is, in the most abstract terms possible,
'alternative' can easily imply 'popular' and vice-versa. In this case, the only difference
of note would appear to be the number of readers or the breadth of circulation. For all
intents and purposes, then, this author considers the terms largely interchangeable.
Considering the lack of any stable definition of "alternative" or "popular" based
on structural or qualitative features of content, the social conditions of production
become the primary dimension of analysis. Despite the fact that actors producing
'alternative' media might not be entirely distinct from those who produce 'mainstream'
forms of media, conditions of production could still differ significantly, regardless of the
actors. The question therefore becomes: who is producing what and why?
Atton (1999b) concisely distills this socio-political basis of 'alternative.'
Building on Michael Traber's (1985) assertion that 'alternative' news was necessarily
limited to"[ ... ] alternative social actors [such as] the poor, the oppressed, the
marginalized and indeed the ordinary manual labourer, woman, youth and child as the
main subjects of [their] news" (qtd. in Atton 1999b: 52), Atton asserts:
Through Traber[ ... ] we can argue that collective methods of organization and
alternative forms of distribution are far from mere ideological fixities; instead
they spring naturally from the nature of the alternative media conceived as
methods of achieving social and political action, rather than merely information
resources that have no more than the 'bottom line' as their main concern
(l 999b:73).

20

Atton goes so far as to produce the following 'Typology of Radical and
Alternative Media" which covers both qualitative aspects of content as well as social
dimensions of production:
1. Content (politically radical, socially/culturally radical); news values
2. Form- Graphics, visual language; varieties of presentation and binding;
aesthetics
3. Reprographic innovations/adaptations- use of mimeographs, IBM typesetting,
offset litho, photocopiers
4. 'Distributive use' [ ... ]-alternative sites for distribution, clandestine/invisible
distribution networks, anti-copyright
5. Transformed social relations, roles and responsibilities- reader-writers,
collective organization, de-professionalization of e.g., journalism, printing,
publishing
6. Transformed communication processes- horizontal linkages, networks
(1999a:27)
Two of Atton's criteria are materially aesthetic (form and reprographics), while
the rest refer to social modes of production. We can conclude, therefore, that any
differences in news media which involve creating an 'alternative' publication rely much
more heavily on the social and political motivations of their creators than anything else.
Other categorical qualities have shown themselves to be difficult if not impossible to
demonstrate, since kinds of news appear to exist on a stylistic and ideological continuum
just as journalists themselves do. From this perspective, any argument which posits the
'decline' of 'mainstream' news or even rests on a stable taxonomy of news production
based on content is at best confusing and at worst fundamentally incoherent. As well, it
may even be true that the 'alternative' press, in any meaningful sense of the term, no
longer exists in a relevant way.
As Conboy (2007) explains, "In our contemporary capitalist consumer culture, it
is hard to envisage much in the way of journalism which is produced entirely by ordinary
people and consumed by sufficient numbers of them to maintain regular production as

21

journalism given the institutional and financial demands of the genre" (2007:2). Most of
journalism is thus professionalized and produced on a scale which renders it "popular" in
at least one sense of the word.
Thus, Conboy (2007) suggests that "previously convenient distinctions between
elite and popular culture often no longer apply." Moreover, he provocatively opines that:
Under pressures from increased capitalization and technological innovation we
have seen the beginnings of professional convergence withinjournalism and
following this trend we are quite possibly seeing a corresponding popular
convergence in which previously distinct aspects of popular journalism blend and
mix with other genres the better to fulfill its purpose of making money and
darning influence by articulating the interests and the voice of the people
(2007:2).
Based on this reading of contemporary print media, the creation of opposing
categories of media production is a feature of certain social relations and conscious
positioning rather than a valid evaluation based on a set of qualitative features. This
synthetic manner of parsing up the media landscape is not necessarily a new
phenomenon, nor an outgrowth of the increasingly fragmented and large pool of
contemporary production, however, as a historical view of the evolution of journalism
will indicate. On the contrary, it appears to be a key indicator of the nature of the metadiscourse surrounding journalistic production and further motivation to investigate first
hand the social conditions at the site of production itself. If no journalistic practices can
properly be divided into corresponding "alternative" and "mainstream" spheres of
production, and, as Stuart Allan (I 999) has claimed, that all journalism is necessarily
'popular,' then it is not a great leap in logic to say, as Peter Dahlgren (1992) has, that
journalism has much in common with the similarly difficult to classify cultural

22

productions of art, literature and language and should be treated as such (Conboy
2007:3).
Alt Weeklies in Historical Perspective
As Ornebring and Jonsson (2004 ), as well as Conboy (2007), illustrate, the
socially driven categories of 'high' and 'low' journalism as much as 'soft' and 'hard'
news have a historical precedent, and are better understood as historical and political
constructions than useful generic markers. Conboy (2007) appropriately observes that
"historical perspective also demonstrates that journalism has always been part of a
general process of making information accessible to people outside the narrow confines
of power-elites and gossip-mongers" (2007: 1).
Indeed, in the 19th century, one finds ready examples of this dynamic in the newly
invented "tabloid" papers in England as well as the "penny press" of the United States.
Tabloid journalism appeared as the brain child of Alfred Harmsworth in late 19th century
England, mainly as a design innovation, since 'tabloid' in its most literal sense, refers
only to the size of the paper. The first "tabloid" to appear by that name was
Harmsworth's Daily Mail (I 896) as part of a broad effort to make papers with "mass
market appeal" with a product that was "easier to handle and read on the bus, tram and
other forms of public transport" (Ornebring and Jonsson 2004:287)
Before this approach to journalism was dubbed "tabloid," however, "popular
journalism" appeared in the US as early as 1830, with Benjamin Day's New York Sun
(1833) as an example of a cheap newspaper which catered to "a newly literate pubic that
did not have much in common with the newspaper public of a mere ten years earlier."
The result was a paper which encouraged a different topical focus and tone, engendering

23

along the way the birth of the "human interest" story, divorced as it was from an early
overemphasis in journalism on political and economic issues of interest only to the
"property class." As these papers began to achieve commercial success, however,
existing broadsheets criticized the new publications on charges of sensationalism, as they
printed "scandalous tales of sin, the immoral antics of the upper class, and humorous tales
of mishaps" in addition to crime and police stories (Ornebring and Jonsson 2004:288).
Ornebring and Jonsson contend therefore, that the characterizations of tabloids as
journalistically unsound are the result of an economic rivalry between the newcomers and
established, elite interests. Despite the persistence of "binary oppositions, where
emotional is bad and rational-intellectual is good, sensation is contrasted with
contextualisation and tabloid journalism is charged with meeting complexity with
dumbing down," Ornebring and Jonsson argue that tabloid journalism could constitute an
"alternative public sphere" (2004:284), which arose in the face of the "failure of other
societal institutions[ ... ] to address adequately issues of vital concern to many members
of the public." Because they increase the spectrum of news coverage and its perceived
audience, then, "tabloid forms may provide new opportunities for representation and
recognition for groups outside the mainstream" (2004:293).
Although not an unbroken lineage, the early history of popular journalism is
paralleled in many important ways by the rise of a wave of radical and underground
publications during the mid to late I 960s. These papers, for their part, represented
another frenzied generation of publications produced to suit an audience which was not
being adequately served. From the first issue of the Los Angeles Free Press in 1964 and
of the Berkeley Barb in 1965, David Armstrong (1981) notes that by 1966, there were as

24

many as 400 underground newspapers, serving a readership of several million that was
"overwhelmingly young, [ ... ] white and middle class" (1981 :32). These papers produced
what Armstrong terms an "eclectic" mix of topics such that any broad definition would
be difficult, but by and large the underground newspapers of the 1960s wrote about
liberal political and social topics with an edgier, more aggressive tone which resonated
with a large segment of the population (1981:45).
As time passed, however, the increasing popularity and profitability of these
publications resulted in significant aesthetic and production changes. To make money,
many papers relied on pornographic ads that no other paper would print, along with a
smattering of music advertisements from major record labels. However, as the Vietnam
War ended, and audiences began to fragment politically, underground papers lost
advertising and revenue to newer publications which were politically neutral, but kept the
edgy "youth" style of the early underground press (Armstrong 1981:180-84).
Armstrong cites the rise of the Rolling Stone as a specific example, but more
generally laments that "underground media activists had underestimated the adaptability
of mainstream culture" and that the "commercialization that proceeded apace in the late
sixties was the complementary opposite of the political suppression of the same era"
(179). As a result, more mellow, commercial 'alternative' publications emerged to serve
the same readers, the "Woodstock Generation a decade later, looking for a condominium
rather than a tab of LSD, the 18 to 37 year olds coveted by advertisers" (1981 :267). This
involved the development of a "core of experienced professionals" who worked to
change the confrontational position of the underground papers urging for "revolution"

25

into the "message that working models of reality substantially different from mainstream
culture already existed" (1981:182-3).
Emphasizing this distance, Harcup (1998, 2006) insists on the "demise of the
local alternative press," at least in England. Harcup here uses 'alternative local press' to
refer to "local newspapers[ ... ] which were independently and usually cooperatively
owned; geographically based; and defined themselves as providing 'ordinary people'
with an alternative to the mainstream media" (1998: l 06). Leeds Other Paper was such a
publication, and while it offered a locally produced newspaper which focused on the
'ordinary' citizen, and consistently, in Harcup's words, "demonstrated that there was
more than one way of looking at the world," "contested the accepted notions of common
sense" and "illustrated how news and views relied on social construction as much as the
reporting of any objective truth" (1998:J 13). Eventually, however, LOP was unable to
maintain its existence:
[ ... )despite its journalistic achievements, and its development of a
comprehensive arts listings guide, sales of LOP rearly topped the 2500 mark[ ... ]
In the quest for a younger, more postmodern readership, it gradually became more
of a what's on guide with 'lifestyle' features and fewer hard news stories.
Dwindling sales and mounting debts, combined with increasing staff turnover and
burnout, a declining number of contributors and chronic under-capitalisation,
resulted in the paper publishing its final issue on 20 January 1994 (1998:114).
Broadly, underground papers had succeeded in expanding the news spectrum, as
Jean-Francois Bizot wryly comments that the major papers were now "publishing scoops
such as Watergate that had formerly been the bread and butter of the UPS [underground
press syndicate]." (2006: 227) But, as Armstrong has demonstrated above, many
underground newspapers failed to remain profitable enough to survive. As a result, Bizot
laments that "Thirty years later, the underground press has virtually disappeared" (2006:

26

227). However, certain papers, such as the Rolling Stone as well as the Village Voice,
succeeding in transitioning from underground publications into profitable organizations,
and furthermore tended to market themselves to the same readership. Thus, a broad trend
among underground or alternative newspapers was both increasing commoditization of
content (more ads and associated entertainment guides and features) along with a
reinforcement of the underground aesthetic which allowed them to reach the same
young, white, affluent and urban readers who could now be utilized, profitably, as a
saleable ad demographic.
A similar example can be found in the specific lineage of PW. PW, before 1995,
was the Welcomat, an eccentric local paper that was described by a former editor as
"basically one gigantic opinion page." The Welcomat was established in 1971 and
survived, profitably, through the years with a small, if steady, circulation. As Jim
Knipfel, a former columnist, reminisced:
[we] transformed the Welcomat into exactly what we thought it should be [ ... ] we
brought in writers and cartoonists we liked, we ran stories we liked. The office
walls became covered with insane posterage [sic], the ceiling a home to a hundred
or more species of dangling plastic animal. The air in that room filled with music
few people could tolerate (Knipfel 2006:np).
Dan Rottenberg, editor at the Welcomat from 1981 to 1993, describes the paper as
"a unique, revolutionary experiment in pushing the boundaries of free speech" whose
"willingness to speak truth to power generated a loyal audience that translated into ad
linage and revenues three or four times the size of its closest competitor, the Philadelphia
City Paper" (New York 2006: np). However, in 1992, the owner of the paper, Susan
Seiderman, brought in a new publisher, Michael Cohen, who decided to revamp the paper
into a new format. In a period which a current editor describes as "total chaos," every

27

staff member save for two was fired, and in the spring of 1995 the paper was changed
"overnight" into an alt weekly.
For some, including Knipfel, who will refer to Cohen only as "Baldy Fuckwad,"
this transition was a form of betrayal. Knipfel describes acts of editorial sedition on the
part of Cohen:
suddenly he was back there in the editorial office, making suggestions and sitting
in on editorial meetings. It became evident that what we were doing wasn't
"commercial" enough for him, and he scheming to take steps to remedy that. [ ... ]
a whole new editorial staff was brought in, and the name of the paper was
changed, and it became "commercial." It also became just another one of those
bland, predictable weekly "alternative" papers that you'll find in every major
American city, with the same stories, the same attitudes, the same comic strips
(Knipfel 2006:np).
Rottenberg is similarly critical of Cohen, accusing him of turning the vibrant
Welcomat into "a generic youth-oriented alternative weekly indistinguishable from the
City Paper." The current editor, however, responded directly to these criticisms by
claiming that:
Cohen quadrupled the editorial staff and budget [ ... ], transforming what had been
a vanity paper run by sycophants into a vital alternative newspaper with a heart
and soul that's launched many writing careers (New York 2006:np).
While the details are admittedly muddy, the trend for the newspapers founded in
the late sixties and early seventies as "underground" or "alternative" publications to
undergo difficult transitions in order to retain their appeal to a changing and fragmenting
readership was obviously widespread. Taking a specific example, figures 1.1-1.4 show a
local example, the Distant Drummer, which was founded as an underground paper in
Philadelphia in 1966. In the span of 13 years, however, the roughshod, DIY underground
political newspaper had become noticeably more entertainment oriented. Interestingly,
the listings, which Harcup noted that LOP undertook only as a last ditch effort to save the

28

paper, have been present in The Drummer since the very first issue. Today, one still
finds an "8 Days" feature printed in PW which is remarkably similar to the '8 Days a
Week' of the Drummer (Fig. 1.5).
As Armstrong (1981) has pointed out, contemporary alternative publications can
trace their origins back to both populist tabloid newspapers of the late 19th and early 20th
centuries as well as the 'activist' journalism of the underground newspapers of the 1960s
and 70s (1981 :276). While earlier underground and alternative papers may have tended
to attack the established political power structure from a more 'grassroots' standpoint
with writers and staff who were not necessarily formal journalists, as the above examples
show, alternative publications began to professionalize and hone their commercial skills
in order to increase revenue and survive financially. What seems to have been carried
over is a certain aesthetic sensibility, closely linked to the inclusiveness and brash tone of
19th century tabloids as well as the same cheeky irreverence and colorful design of the
60s underground publications. Consequently, speaking aesthetically, PW is not so far
removed from Philadelphia's singular underground newspaper, the irregularly published
Defenestrator, both of which can be traced back, in a limited way, to the underground
proliferation in the late I 960s. As Figures 2.1 and 2.2 show, both are tabloids which rely
on a striking artistic component to text layout and showcase features.
However, much in keeping with the criticisms of Knipfel and Rottenberg,
Armstrong considers these publications "alternatives in the broadest sense" since the only
ways they differ from the 'mainstream' daily newspapers are:
their relative ease of access for unknown or offbeat contributors; their use of the
personal voice in writing; their willingness to do in-depth, magazine-style features
about issues generally skimmed by daily newspapers and electronic media; their
willingness to jab at the local power structure (1981 :277).

29

Indeed, Armstrong accuses the alternative weeklies as being nothing more than
"hybrids" of earlier publications which favor "pleasure rather than struggle; status rather
than the erasure of privilege; enjoyment of the world as it is rather than visions of the
world as it might be." (1981:279) In more neutral terms, they utilize stylistic elements of
the radical and underground press as an environment in which they can commercialize
and profit from a demographic rather than mobilize a constituency. In fact, alt weeklies
find such a willing pool of advertisers that they are mostly distributed free to readers.
Despite the misgivings of some, the alt weekly has succeeded in securing a large
and profitable audience. According to the Project for Excellence in Journalism, the
audience for urban alt weeklies peaked in 2001 at 7.79 million, but continues to hold
steady at 7.64 million in 2005, up from around 2.5 million in 1989. Furthermore, as the
survey data from PEJ shows, the audience for alt weeklies is already old, with a median
age of 40.3 years. Contrary to what one might think from their "hip" style, alt weeklies
are not necessarily niche publications, as PEJ reports that
The alternative weeklies are well-established papers, entrenched in many
communities as more than simply tabloids for the young. As we have mentioned
in previous years, weeklies are by no means outsider publications; their readers
have an average income of over $51,000 and more than 40% of them have college
degrees. And the rising rate of those who are married with children in the house
reinforces their broader appeal (2006:np ).
As well, in 1978, alt weeklies banded together to form a trade organization, the
Association of Alternative Newsweeklies (AAN), which now comprises 124 "non-daily
free-circulation papers." AAN also brings its members under a national advertising
umbrella, courtesy of the Ruxton Media Group, which sells national ads in the network of
alt weeklies (2007: np). Thus, while PW clearly reflects the aesthetic and topical

30

influences of the underground press, the paper has undergone a thorough process of
commercialization which has stripped it of any grassroots political motivation. PW now
has "something for everybody" because the paper is a capitalistic enterprise which caters
to a saleable advertising demographic.
To conclude, examining the history of any publication, much less an entire genre
with an uncertain definition and fluid boundaries, is fraught with gaps of information and
often necessitates making certain leaps. While it was not the intention of this section to
be in any sense a definitive, or even complete, history of alternative publications nor PW,
I believe it does show that current media forms have very specific evolutionary links, and
that certain themes have remained in the public discourse surrounding journalistic
production for nearly two hundred years. The questions posed even then are still
relevant, as we are faced with media forms that have moved past socially motivated
origins as sites of resistance and otherness and into a new paradigm of
commercialization. The next section, which details my ethnographic observations, seeks
to understand the current productive environment at PW by questioning its sense of
institutional identity.
Ethnographic Perspectives at the Weekly
For the staff of PW, the publication is distinct from others in the media
environment, especially from the 'mainstream' daily newspapers such as the Inquirer and
the Daily News. This is well reflected in their comments regarding the nature of their
publication, as well as some characteristics of the workplace and the editorial hierarchy.
However, much as we would expect from the above discussion, a sense of being radically
different is no longer salient for defining the weekly in a world where qualitative

31

distinctions are collapsing, and market dictates are shaping all publications into
capitalistic enterprises dependent on the bottom line. This section relates to the qualities
of 'altness' at the weekly both from the responses of the staff to my questions as well as
my own observations.
For convenience, I have divided them into sections which correspond to the three
broad fields defined by Sparks (2000), though this is no way an attempt to impose an
evaluative framework. Rather, these admittedly vague tags are entry points by which we
may describe an otherwise fluid and illegible set of deeply enmeshed characteristics. It
should also be noted that my analysis is structured very differently from Patricia Gibbs'
(2003), and while I will use her work to put my own in perspective, our observations and
subjects differ in numerous and important ways, which I will discuss in more detail at the
end of this section.
Political
People and Hierarchy
In terms of the demographics of its staff, PW does not necessarily fall outside of
the 'mainstream.' The staff of PW includes several people with diverse backgrounds, but
it certainly does not reach parity on all counts. Of twelve editors and staff writers, six are
women, but only one is African American in a city that is approximately 43 percent
African American. However, even this is seen as a positive development, as one editor
noted that alt weeklies "have a historical tendency to be young and white" and that a
prominent colwnn by an African American writer would not have been found in the
genre only five or ten years ago. Most of the other editors and writers, however, are
relatively young and mostly white.

32

In the office, despite the relative racial, economic and educational homogeneity of
the editorial staff, PW embraces a sense of newsroom democracy that, at least on the
surface, is non-hierarchical. According to the Editor in Chief, he pays "little or no
attention to established writers" on staff. Instead, he claimed to rely on the "individual
character" of each writer to search out the topics that interested them and ensure that the
paper remained "edgy" and up to date.
True to form, each large section of the paper is the purview of a single, quasi
independent editor. 'Hard' news is contained in the "front of the book" in section called
"This Just In" and is controlled by the Managing Editor, who works with staff writers,
freelancers and interns to shape the section each week. Although the editor can have an
active role in selecting or soliciting content, staff writers, interns or freelancers usually
submit stories in the form of a short 'pitch,' either via email or in person. This same
process is used by the other editors who are in charge of Arts and Entertainment (A&E,
or the "back of the book"), Film, Food, Music, Listings and the two or so biogs which are
written more or less independently by staff members. Once the editor has chosen the
pieces for publication, the contents for the coming week are presented to the remainder of
the editorial staff in a weekly meeting. Larger projects are often discussed many weeks
ahead of time, but in all my observations, I did not see a single heated criticism or
rejection of a piece once it had been chosen by its corresponding editor. It should also be
noted, however, that most of the senior editors and writers have personal relationships
which allow them to discuss content decisions outside of the staff meeting forum. As

2

Gibbs (2003:593) notes a similar situation at her site of study, with an alt weekly staff which is "not
reflective of the ethnic makeup of the larger population of the state [Hawaii] [ ... ]" and furthermore that

"The staff is also overwhelmingly young, with most in their 20s and 30s and fewer, more veteran workers,

in their mid 40s or 50s. Roughly 50 percent of the workers are female and 50 percent are male."

33

such, it is a possibility that an informal hierarchy of personal relations has a significant
influence on content decisions. All the same, these observations are strong indications of
a compartmentalized and diffuse sense of authority.
A conspicuous example of internal editorial independence is a "back of the book"
editor who often writes about topics and publishes pieces which other staff members are
not enthusiastic about. Even the Editor in Chief admitted that he had difficultly
"relating" to this particular editor's tastes, and other staff members reacted ambivalently
when presented with his ideas. During the weekly staff meetings, the back of the book
editor oftentimes employed a dry, ribald wit which did not always solicit laughs from his
front of the book colleagues 3 and often led to desultory conversations about various popculture icons. While it is difficult to demonstrate this separation effectively, Figures 3.13.4 contains a juxtaposition of 'line-ups' for the 'front of the book' and the 'back of the
book' for a given week. Examining them side by side, we can see a significant aesthetic
and topical contrast, from which it is not difficult to infer that more than one editorial
tone prevails at the weekly.
Another editor, known for his slapstick and unfailingly vulgar columns
(exemplified in Figure 4) had no qualms about his literary tone and its place: "I doubt I'd
be tolerated for more than five minutes at the Inquirer." This same writer/editor
articulated, in the same speech, both that "capitalism is a bad thing," and that criticism of
the popular media, such as tabloid newspapers, was most often the result of "effete craft
snobbery."

3

For example, at a staff meeting the Music Editor encouraged everybody to go see Bobby Conn because
"there's a good chance he'll take his penis out." There then followed one of the most lively discussions of

the meeting, where the Music Editor debated the rest of the room about the quality ofVHI 's series "White
Rapper." He was alone in his praise of the show.

34

By and large, while it is a stretch to say that the staff of PW is entirely
representative of its wider community, it is nothing if not inclusive and open to a
different range of political ideas from its staff which are not necessarily represented
strongly elsewhere. However, as we shall see from the concrete sense of the readership
in the minds of the editors as well as their thoughts on the distinctness of the publication,
PW occupies a generally well-defined place in the media landscape.
Readership in the Minds of the Editors
One of the few things universally agreed upon at the weekly was its specific
demographic. For a senior staff writer, the paper was a "niche publication" for "younger,
more affluent and educated" readers. While he acknowledged that PW skewed a little
older than other alt weeklies, for him, the primary audience was "college aged kids up to
young adults in their early thirties." For another editor the response was "hip, young and
white," while an intern dubbed the paper the "alternative, left-leaning voice of the young
urban population." Most of the salient characteristics of the paper's readers (according to
the editorial staff) fell somewhere into this vague realm of "young, urban and hip."
However, this characterization seems to be more a result of well-published media
research than of first hand observations, and many editors expressed reservations about
its utility. One editor noted that the advertising staff talked a lot about the specific
demographics of the target audience, and mused that if it were up to them, the whole of
the paper's content would be tailored to fit that demographic. To the editor, this would
only succeed at making the weekly "stilted" and "fake." While the editor didn't challenge
the correctness of the demographic information, since he was sure "they spend a lot of
time and money on it," he didn't think that the demographic was really all that "relevant"

35

to producing quality journalism. Rather, the editor expressed confidence in the paper's
strategy, already articulated by a senior editor above and somewhat illustrated by the
degree of internal editorial independence, to trust each individual writer's interests to
follow the broader interests of the readership at large.
Indeed, there were discrepancies between the widely circulated demographics
used to sell ads and editorial opinion. The two most senior editors interviewed both
agreed that the paper had "matured" in the 13 years they had been at the helm, and to a
certain extent had become more "mainstream," with "something for everybody." Despite
this ambiguity, many media guides, such as the Ruxton Media Group, which sells
national ads in many alt weeklies across the country, describe PW's readers as "an
extremely loyal audience of young, educated and active readers who are difficult to target
using conventional media." On the other hand, RMG puts total readership at 336,000
(Ruxton 2007: np).
Regardless of the wide recognition of the existence of this homogenous set of
"young, urban and hip" readers, opinion among the editorial staff was largely hostile
towards media research. As noted in the opening anecdote, some staff at the paper
expressed serious doubts about the methodological validity of the market research, a
sentiment which was echoed by another editor, who said that the system was "total
bullshit" since it only used landline telephone surveys that probably excluded younger
readers, many of whom may only have cellular phones. Without skipping a beat, the
same editor asserted that "everybody hates Media Audit." She recounted a hypothetical
example based on several actual experiences in which the media research company would
tell the editorial staff that pickup rates were dropping due to a lack of interest on the part

36

of one audience segment, only to come back with the opposite in the next report. In her
words:
'You're losing the females,' they would say, and so we would add a female
columnist or something only to have them come back the next year telling us that
the male readership was dropping off.
Her frustration was echoed by many other staff members, one of whom during a
staff meeting discussion of recent cover stories wondered aloud, "Do people really even
care anymore?" The question, far from being merely a rhetorical expression of
frustration emphasizes an underlying concern at the publication, more explicitly
articulated by a senior staff writer as the general problem for all print media: "Everybody
is trying to figure out the formula to reach readers effectively."
This need to 'reach' readers was often discussed during staff meetings, and
especially in reference to cover stories. A senior writer who wrote features very often
contended that stories had to convey a strong sense of a "personality" or character which
"makes it easier to follow, easier to get into." He referred to the amount of reader mail he
received for particular stories as a gauge, using his recent series of journalistic criticism
as an example: "Nobody responded when we wrote about Knight-Ridder, but Brian
[Tierney] is different[ ... ] now people write in." During staff meetings, he consistently
conveyed the same attitude, encouraging a personalized tone for cover stories with a
human dimension, citing narrative stories with "compelling characters" which would
produce an "emotional bond" with the reader, even while other writers advocated a more
thematic approach of "topics from a different angle."
Interestingly, perceived reader interest was often used as a primary gauge of
quality for material. This interest was measured via web hits for the online version as

37

well as through the volume of mail (emails) to the editor. For example, when a new
feature appeared, called "Angry Grammarian," a key topic of discussion in the staff
meeting was the fact that the column had generated more letters than all the other stories
put together. Similarly, returning to the above argument over the style of successful
cover stories, the senior staff writer explicitly referred to the fact that an article based on
a "compelling character" was among the top five most accessed stories on the website.
Even more fascinating was the Editor in Chief's suggestion that since reader pickup rates
determined the publication's salability to advertisers, alt weeklies were indirectly forced
to "stay edgy or go out of business," a situation which he dubbed "capitalism in the raw."
Generally, two themes emerged over the course of discussing readership
demographics with the editorial staff. First and foremost, nobody accepted the Media
Audit data without, at best, a healthy dose of skepticism. Editors were unequivocally
frustrated both with the quality of the data and its applications to content to boost pickup
rates. Secondly, despite these widespread doubts, editors and writers nonetheless had a
conception of who was reading the paper, and based content related decisions on whether
or not they thought a certain kind of story would increase pickup rates. Therefore, it is
fair to say that even though the editorial staff mistrusted the data they received, they still
expressed an interest in responding to the readership with content that 'they' would find
interesting. This belief was strong enough in some cases to encourage a Darwinian
analogy in which readership demand determined the survival of the 'hippest' publication
most in touch with the need and interests of its intended demographic.
Binary Antagonisms

38

PW is largely structured according to two sets of extremely distinct divisions.
Broadly, the Editorial staff exists somewhat at odds with "the other side" of the
advertising staff, which, interestingly enough, is also the source of a biannual softball
rivalry. While the entire staff of the paper shares one contiguous workspace, a common
reproduction area and two narrow hallways separate the "Eds" from the "Addies."
As an editor explains it, however, this basic division is essential, and this "literal
and figurative wall" should exist in "any newspaper that's worth its weight in salt." Four
years ago, before PW moved to its current location, the administration, advertising and
editorial sections were all on different floors and "we liked it that way," reminisced one
editor. The editor recalled that many people were initially apprehensive about sharing
floor space with the advertising section, worrying that the ad people would be "getting all
up in our business." Speaking bluntly, he remarked that "we don't want them to know
what we're doing." He gave two main reasons. First, they could leak information to
clients in inappropriate ways, which would undermine the paper's credibility. In the
editor's terms, a newspaper who sold ads directly based on content was not
"journalistically sound." Secondly, since any article can be "changed or pulled at the last
minute" he questioned the intelligence of such a "hypothetical" strategy, meaning that
even if a publication sold ads directly based on content, it would be difficult to tie ads to
specific pieces since they could be changed right up until the last minute. Overall, he
emphasized that you "never want even the appearance that the advertisers are affecting
editorial content."
Thus, the Editorial staff operated with an explicit sense of independence from the
advertising staff, which, as noted previously, uses an expensive subcontractor to generate

39

extremely specific readership demographics which they can in turn present to buyers as
the audience for their advertisement. All the editors, when asked about the relationship
between the two sides of the floor, emphasized the importance of having an
"independent" editorial staff, but there is nevertheless a significant amount of overlap
between advertising and editorial content.
As we have seen, a distinct sense of who is reading the paper is an important
component in the way the editors choose and evaluate stories. Inasmuch as they use this
abstraction as a metric for quality, oftentimes editors referred to the advertising
demographic as a force which shaped content in significant ways. As one editor said,
matter-of-factly, "The guides are vehicles to sell ads" and so "they have to be a cheery,
happy thing." These guides are seasonal and/or thematic issues (eg. "Spring Guide" or
"Restaurant Guide") which focus on particular topics. However, this was not a widely
held idea at the weekly, as the other editors seemed to think that the barrier between
advertising and editorial was as strong as ever.
Even within the editorial section there are significant separations between those
who work on the "hard news" oriented 'front of the book' and those who work on the
A&E 'back of the book' section. Recalling the personal idiosyncrasies of the previously
mentioned back of the book editor, the split between news and entertainment produces a
similar kind of tension.
A senior staff writer remarked that in the last five to seven years, PW had gone
from "grudgingly" supporting A&E to putting more effort into that section over all
others. He noted that there were "more voices" and more "feedback" for the A&E
section than for the front of the book. However, for the senior staff writer, this was

40

primarily a temporary staffing problem that resulted from the recent reduction of the
permanent writing staff from four to two. "It's in the nature of alt weeklies. We'll never
get the funding for six or eight writers to cover for one another." The result, according to
the staff writer, was "blips," or inconsistencies, in news coverage. The turnover of staff
writers was also not overly disturbing for him because the paper tends to hire writers
"sporadically" to "fill certain niches." He therefore viewed the problem as temporary and
cyclical, saying that although there were "wobbly" periods, eventually "we get our shit
together."
The difficulty of producing quality, traditional journalism also came up with
another editor, who remarked that the primary reasons readers picked up alt weeklies was
for their "calendars, movie reviews and show previews." Certainly, it was generally
accepted in staff meetings that the largest web hits were generated by these types of
articles. Rather than viewing the difficulty of producing traditional 'hard' news as a
specific feature of staffing difficulties, however, the editor saw profound changes
happening in the way news was consumed that made it next to impossible to present
relevant issues in a weekly format. In a newly "compressed, online news cycle," more
news was breaking more quickly online, while print publications, and more specifically
large metropolitan daily broadsheets, begun to rely more heavily on stories culled from
wire services. While weekly publications like PW would formerly do a more "in depth
analysis" of the "day to day breaking news" in the dailies, the editor lamented the fact
that now "by the time PW does a cover story that was significant in the last issue, the
news cycle has already moved on." The Editor in Chief articulated yet another

41

perspective, asserting that readers picked up the paper primarily for its "compelling cover
stories" and then were drawn to the entertainment features and listings.
Aesthetic
PW makes an obvious effort to distinguish itself from other publications in the
genre, and 'mainstream' publications in particular. Referring to earlier radical
publications, one editor made an explicit distinction between the "crusty old hippies" of
established alt weeklies and the new, "scrappy" weeklies that tended to "push the
envelope more." For example, this editor had a long background with alternative
publications and before coming to PW had worked at one of these "scrappy" publications
in Pittsburgh. For her, PW had matured as a paper, and could no longer do stories that
risked challenging the readership and/or eliminating the abstract advertising demographic
which is so prominent in the minds of the editors. To take a specific example, she
reminisced about a Valentines Day issue which featured nothing but death themed
content such as a macabre interview with an undertaker. She recognized, regretfully, that
while it was no longer possible, economically, to do things that were "experimental," she
realistically remarked that PW still existed, while the 'experimental' paper had long since
gone under.
At several different times, editors and interns alike proposed that PW occupied an
important liberal-leaning niche. Early on in our interview, a senior editor cited the
importance of the paper in representing the non-entitled. As a general rule, he proposed,
"when in doubt, side with the poor," something that for him was part of the "alt weekly
tradition." Other members of theed staff had similar thoughts, with a senior writer
acknowledging the importance of"preaching from the left."

42

This perspective is blatant within the pages of each and every issue of PW, and
only a few examples need be noted. Since the beginning of the second Iraq War, the
paper has published a list of civilian and American military casualties that is updated
every week. Politically, the paper has unequivocally endorsed Democratic candidates
(such as Senator Bob Casey) while vigorously opposing Republican candidates (such as
Rick Santorum). Another popular target which has appeared as the subject of a cover
story was ultra conservative Philadelphia commentator Michael Smerconish, who has
also been depicted satirically with filled in thought bubbles. As well, a staff writer has
written extensively over the past year about escalating gun violence in the city and its
effect on local neighborhoods, culminating in a recent article in which she dubbed the
city "Killadelphia."
Besides this political stance which is notably less neutral than might be expected
from a 'mainstream' broadsheet newspaper, PW covers topics which would not ordinarily
find their way into large scale media outlets. Perhaps the best example is a recent cover
story on transsexual African American fashion shows which happen to have a significant
following in the Philadelphia area. As well, the paper's entertainment listings cover a
range of underground, independent and local bands which might otherwise only be found
viaMySpace. Notable sex columnist (and vocal gay rights advocate) Dan Savage also
finds his way into the pages, an addition that would likely not be well tolerated in the
pages of a metropolitan daily.
A similar distinguishing characteristic of PW which sets it apart from others in the
media landscape is its unflinching embrace of profanity and its refusal to censor its
writers. While this language finds its way into news features less often, there is no word

43

that the paper will not print, nor does it stop its writers from making outlandish satirical
statements. A good example, reproduced in Figure 5, is the vulgarity ridden "Black Like
Me" columns iu the A&E section, which, although they have generated a substantial
amount of negative feedback from readers, continue to run.
This offbeat and permissive tone extends to the working environment as well,
where on various days writers can be heard discussing issues, loudly over the walls of
their cubicles, ranging from the coffee in the break room to local politics while the music
editor plays various video and sound clips. Other days, baked goods and free items show
up on a table which is recognized as community property. At the extreme end of the
spectrum, one day saw a game of pickup kickball start between the Editor in Chief and
another staff member in the narrow corridors leading to the Ad Staffs space. Crossing
over from once space to the other is to pass from an often noisy and chaotic space strewn
with back issues, old copy, books, eds, a pifiata, streamers and plastic lobsters left over
from two separate birthday parties and pinned up cartoons to a quiet peninsula of
"legitimate" office space.
Additionally, some of the greatest efforts to appear "alternative" manifest
themselves in the decidedly festive and open work environment that PW tries to foster.
Suits and ties are rarely, if ever, seen inside the editorial section, and everybody remains
on a first name basis, regardless of position. However, despite the openness of the work
environment, it is not clear that this sense of being apart from a typical business
environment extends all the way across the Ed/Addie divide, nor does it necessarily
guarantee that the produced text itself differs in any significant way from others which
are produced in the city and target a specific demographic for a profit.

44

Quantitative
PW is, by the standards of alternative weeklies, a large paper, with a weekly print
run of roughly 101, 000 distributed via 2500 bright yellow boxes located in and around
Philadelphia. This distribution, however, is anything but geographically homogenous.
While detailed data on location was unavailable, a brief survey of boxes revealed an
obvious lack of distribution points in the marginalized areas of the city, such as public
housing complexes, compared to extremely wealthy enclaves such as the campus of the
University of Pennsylvania as well as Main Line suburbs such as Wyndmoor. Even if the
paper contains "something for everybody," certain readers have to walk farther from their
homes for a copy than others 4 .
While billed as an independent paper, PW is in fact owned by a corporation.
Review Publishing, Inc. owns a number of weekly papers, including PW, The South
Philadelphia Review and Atlantic City Weekly. However, there is no evidence
whatsoever to indicate that the paper's owner exerts much, if any, control over the
paper's content. He did not attend any weekly editor's meetings during which such
decisions were made, nor does he maintain an office in PW's downtown space.
Nevertheless, fears stoked by recent rumors about the paper's possible sale to another
large corporation reinforced the fact the editors are in control of only the words printed
on the pages.
Philadelphia Weekly is a member of the Association of Alternative Weeklies, a
national organization which provides a variety of services for its members, including

4
Armstrong (1981:294) uses the term "journalistic redlining" to describe a similar situation in which a free
newspaper, the Berkeley Monthly is delivered door to door in "middle class and affluent neighborhoods."
Armstrong wryly notes that "Poor people in its circulation area are, in effect, too poor to receive this
periodical."

45

annual awards and, as Gibbs (2003:589), notes, serves as an important umbrella
organization which helps alt weeklies consolidate their selling power in the advertising
market. AAN describes its role thusly:
The Association of Alternative Newsweeklies (AAN) is the trade organization for
the alternative newspaper business. AAN is a diverse group of 125 non-daily freecirculation papers that are distributed in all of the major metropolitan areas of
North America. Each paper has a distinct, local identity that sets it apart from the
mainstream press in its market.
Since its inception in 1978, AAN's primary mission has been to help its member
papers flourish. The association strives for that ideal by focusing on the following
activities:
1. Promoting quality journalism and editorial excellence among its members;
2. Facilitating access to information to enable member newspapers to raise their
level of professional and business performance;
3. Supporting the marketing and advertising efforts of member newspapers;
4. Increasing awareness of the alternative newspaper business; and
5. Advocating the interests of the industry (AAN 2007: np)
Because these papers are free, however, they rely heavily on advertising. For
example, in a single issue of PW, approximately I 00 out of 166 pages were ads, and
approximately 25 pages were entertainment listings. Although solid numbers were not
available to the author, it was generally understood that the paper was doing well
financially and had been turning a decent profit for some time.
While PW staff makes a concerted effort to separate Eds from Addies, we must
still consider Armstrong's concern that "with advertisers footing all the bills, the
temptation to devote space to airy promotional features that will please them and water
down items that might offend them is enormous" (1981 :294). Indeed, to what extent has
the newly commercialized alt weekly format sacrificed a clear political voice for a place
in the capitalist ecosystem?
Discussion

46

In her incisive study of the political economy of an alt weekly publication in
Honolulu, Patricia Gibbs (2003) concludes:
In fact, the reality of the Weekly is that the 'alternative' label at best only thinly
disguises its deep roots in capitalist modes of production. At worst, it is used to
justify the hyper-exploitation of its workers in the pursuit of matching upscale
readers with niche-market products (2003 :603).
Gibbs saw in the alt weekly a small enterprise which made significant sacrifices
(ie, cheap office space, meager salaries, outdated equipment, etc.) for what was for some
a deeply held idealism, the belief that by working for the paper they were "creating
progressive social change and doing so in a way that is not done elsewhere" (2003 :592).
The paper's strong profit motivation seems to challenge this ideal at least in the sense that
it favors a capitalist system of profit-seeking over democratic redistribution.
While InCheol Min (2004) unsurprisingly commented on the presence and
importance of a discrete readership in the minds of the editors of the alternative political
publication he studied, he added that the abstracted audience was best described as a
"constituency," after Eliaspoh's (1997) conception: "mobilized, active and needing
information to act on an issue that concerns them" (Min 2004:450). Min concludes that
the editors of the paper "view their readers as active in their communities: participating in
political meetings and interested in public issues. Consequently, the Observer tries to
include different voices in society, dealing with labor issues, social movements in other
sates and national politics, for example" (2004:456). In short, the paper facilitates the
activism of a liberal minority in conservative Texas.
PW is, by comparison with both these points, distinct as a large, profitable paper
that, while it preserves a certain aesthetic that sets it apart from a broadsheet newspapers,

47

exists by and large to cater to a demographic which it will in turn sell to an advertising
market in order to turn a profit. At this point, it is fair to say that PW does not fulfill
more than two of the requirements in Atton's (1999a) "Typology of Radical and
Alternative Media:"
1. Content (politically radical, socially/culturally radical); news values
2. Form- Graphics, visual language; varieties of presentation and binding;
aesthetics
3. Reprographic innovations/adaptations- use of mimeographs, IBM typesetting,
offset litho, photocopiers
4. 'Distributive use' [ ... ]- alternative sites for distribution, clandestine/invisible
distribution networks, anti-copyright
5. Transformed social relations, roles and responsibilities- reader-writers,
collective organization, de-professionalization of e.g., journalism, printing,
publishing
6. Transformed communication processes- horizontal linkages, networks
(I 999a:27).

If it is accurate to say that Atton (1999a) begins at the surface and works his way
down, then we have arrived at the crux of the argument against the alt weekly format:
that they only superficially embody (or imitate) previous forms of socially radical or
progressive publications which 'actually did something.' True, PW publishes stories
which are in some sense outside of the 'mainstream' coverage of large daily newspapers
and succeeds in presenting itself as an aesthetically edgy, uniquely manufactured
publication. Although much of this aesthetic sensibility can be traced back to the DIY
ethic of earlier papers, the comparison cannot proceed any further. PW is produced
professionally by experienced staffers, distributed to targeted, educated readers with a
large disposable income and operates in order to turn a profit. While it espouses liberal
politics, it is unlikely that the paper itself engenders much political or social activism,5

5

The link between mass media and social activism is not as yet clearly defined. For discussion, see Atton

(1999a).

48

and there is a strong indication that the traditional journalism it prints is of secondary
importance to its entertainment component.
Just as Gibbs (2003) questioned the motives of the Honolulu Weekly, Conboy
(2007) addresses the issue directly by questioning if these "forms of popular journalism
[are] simply integrating consumers into patterns of capitalist consumption or do they
offer real possibilities of involvement and reflection upon the contemporary?" (2007:3).
While Atton (1999a) proposes that the "alternative public sphere is an appropriate
conceptual foundation from which to understand the production and reception of
autonomously developed accounts of experience, critiques, information and knowledge"
(1999a: 156), the closer we examine the production apparatus of this particular alt weekly
as well as its incorporation of a readership defined in terms of an advertising market, the
more we must admit the difficulty of seeing more than a superficial representation of the
'alternative,' in its most stable sense, that of a production which establishes its alterity on
multiple levels in opposition to a socially constructed other.
Not identifying an alternative weekly as a site of "counter hegemony" has some
serious import. Without noting otherwise, it is all too easy to take this as a piece of
supportive evidence for an older theoretical paradigm. For, although Omebring and
Jonsson (2004) argue effectively for the social value of the popular press of the 19th
century, Louw (2001) insists that these same publications were the beginning of the
"industrialization of western meaning making" and the "institutionalizing of intellectuals
[ ... ] within organizations where the organizing principles were hierarchical and
mechanistic, and where factories geared towards mass production were the model"
(2001:16-17).

49

As a result of these changes, the "communicator" is able to effectively control the
content that the passive "recipient" consumes with minimal or a complete lack of
feedback (2001: 17). Effectively, "the mass media simultaneously increases the reach of
professional communicators, while dramatically narrowing the role of recipients, turning
recipients into passive receivers of meanings made by others" (2001 :18). Because these
media are capitalistic and therefore dependent on attracting a large saleable audience,
they become "organized around the lowest common denominator of the middle class with
disposable income" (2001 :49).
It is not possible to deny this possibility; however, studies of framing effects
(Baum 2002, Druckman 2001) have effectively challenged the notion of a linguistic or
semiotic chain of causality in mass media, while more recent work (Ghentzgow and
Shapiro 2006) has suggested that consumers themselves have a strong influence on the
'bias' of the publications they read. This is not to mention the numerous anthropologic
studies noted in the initial literature review above which describe the irreducibly complex
set of individual and social lenses through which externally generated meanings can be
refracted. Louw's (2001) framework and reasoning, while logically sound and
theoretically expedient, therefore, lack an appreciation of the finer detail that is to be
found in studies with greater depth and sensitivity to variation.
Another way to interpret the increasingly commercial nature of nearly all large
scale publications is through Thomas Frank's (1997b) intriguing "countercultural idea"
which questions once more the binary assertion of the warring factions of 'control' and
'resistance.' Frank's meta analysis of cultural commentary is worth quoting at length:
As existential rebellion has become a more or less official style of Information
Age capitalism, so has the countercultural notion of a static, repressive

50

Establishment grown hopelessly obsolete. However the basic impulses of the
countercultural idea may have disturbed a nation lost in Cold War darkness, they
are today in fundamental agreement with the basic tenets of Information Age
business theory. So close are they, in fact, that it has become difficult to
understand the countercultural idea as anything more than the self-justifying
ideology of the new bourgeoisie that has arisen since the 1960s, the cultural
means by which this group has proven itself ever so much better skilled than its
slow-moving, security-minded forebears at adapted to the accelerated, alwayschanging consumerism of today (1997b:34-5).
Ifwe were to heed Louw's warnings, then who exactly would we rebel against?
Where are the people pulling the levers in our heads? Looking once again at the staff
producing PW, we can see that they have much in common with their own advertising
demographic, in terms of age, ethnicity and class. ls it possible to suggest that this form
of commercialization is, as a pessimistic reading of Prank might suggest, the
appropriation of radical rhetoric as a marketing device? Or, to suggest an alternate
reading, are the "crusty hippies" merely marketing to their peers by referencing a
common experience? As a senior editor at PW noted, "It's not some journalistic
conspiracy, it's producing what sells, what people want." How much can we separate the
editors from their audience, if they fulfill many of the same criteria used to identify the
readership? Similarly, how much of the paper is shaped by reader demand, real or
abstract?
Furthermore, the negative implications of commercialization or commoditization
of the media have been, in some instances, grossly over exaggerated. As Naomi Klein
(2002) remarked about her own activism, "In the absence of a clear legal or political
strategy, we traced back almost all of society's problems to the media and the curriculum,
either through their perpetuation of negative stereotypes or simply by omission"

51

(2002: I 08), a strategy which is inevitably doomed "to eventually fall victim to its own
narcissism" (2002: I 09).
Retrospectively, Klein reexamines the basis for her political activism, and
acknowledges, with some chagrin, that "many of our demands for better representation
were quickly accommodated by marketers, media makers and pop-culture producers"
(2002:110). Thomas Frank (1997a) had earlier termed this transition as the rise of
"liberation marketing" which "knows that the culture trust exists, and it knows that
business has conquered the world. And it offers in response not just soaps that get your
whites whiter, but soaps that liberate you, soda pops that are emblems of individualism,
radios ofresistance, carnivalesque cars, and counterhegemonic hamburgers" (1997a:l 77).
Added to this list could be perhaps 'hepcat newspapers for the stylish rebel.'
Taking this critique of commercialization a little further, we find ourselves in
David Harvey's (2006) world, where "neoliberalism 6 has, in short, become hegemonic as
a mode of discourse. It has pervasive effects on ways of thought to the point where it has
become incorporated into the common-sense way many of us interpret, live in, and
understand the world" (2006:3). This mode ofreasoning extends to the point where even
"the assumption that individual freedoms are guaranteed by freedom of the market and of
trade is a cardinal feature ofneoliberal thinking" (2006:5). In light of this perspective,
how are we to interpret the PW editor's satisfied observation that media competition
based on reaching and retaining relevant advertising demographics as "capitalism in the

6

'Neoliberalism' for Harvey is "in the first instance a theory of political economic practices that proposes

that human well-being can best be advanced by liberating individual entrepreneurial freedoms and skills
within an institutional framework characterized by strong private property rights, free markets and free
trade" (2006:2).

52

raw"? Were Frank and Klein prescient in recognizing, through different channels,
Harvey's assertion that:
Neoliberalism required both politically and economically the construction of a
neoliberal market-based populist culture of differentiated consumerism and
individual libertarianism. As such, it proved more than a little compatible with
that cultural impulse called "post-modernism" which [ ... ] could now emerge full
blown as both a cultural and an intellectual dominant (2006:42) ?
However, it is possible that rather than being sold 'to' an external entity like a
passive commodity, these values were taken into a new sphere of neoliberal exchange by
the very people who held them dear. Rather than default to the pessimistic alarmism of
Louw (among many others), is it so impossible to consider that a capitalistic framework
has, over the course of cyclical upheavals, produced media which a majority of people
find satisfactory and are able to navigate as cognizant actors?
As Mc Nair contends, using the example of the prominent activist Michael Moore,
it is not necessarily logical to assume that commoditization automatically produces
control:
Simply because the accumulated weight of historical, political and cultural
experience means that contemporary capitalism contains within it many
individuals who, far from begin brainwashed or seduced into submission to a
dominant ideology which is opposed to their own interests (if such a thing as a
dominant ideology can be discerned from the diversity and chaos of contemporary
media coverage), are fully aware of the flaws of the system[ ... ] (McNair
2006:95).
By virtue of the fact that any media criticism exists at all, does this not mean that the
'public sphere' is at least in some sense functioning in a 'healthy' manner? Rather than
viewing media commoditization as a hegemonic bottleneck of production, McNair insists
on the existence of a "meaningful [ ... ] plurality of voices within contemporary
capitalism" and that "it is beyond dispute that the system can accommodate and give

53

mainstream visibility to a more diverse, broader range of opinion." Furthermore, "This
has happened because of, and not despite, the commodification of culture. It is the
unplanned and unforeseen consequence of counter-cultural capitalism" (McNair
2006:100).
Thus, McNair, without denying the essential body of knowledge produced by
previous work, simply rejects the influence of the same paradigm of binary opposition
which, as Klein herself has admitted, has produced considerable myopia with regard to
mass media and cultural production more generally. By removing the moral and
aesthetic tags from the analysis of media production under the conditions of late
capitalism, we can see that the negative consequences implicit in a reading ofLouw,
Frank or Klein are not at all a given.
Conclusion
The debate between cultural pessimists and more recent theorists like McNair
(2006) positions journalistic production squarely in a field of capitalist practices of
production and consumption, neither of which is well understood in relation to cultural
production. While we can draw some limited conclusions, we are still left asking what
role mass mediated forms of information play in the social lives of individuals. How can
we understand the relationship between producers, text and receivers? Can we somehow
reconcile critiques based on equal access to the "public sphere" with those that question
the nature of cultural commodification? Unfortunately, these questions are, for the
moment, beyond the scope of this paper and its necessarily limited site of study.

54

Conboy (2004) has previously remarked that "Tabloidization 7 may be the
extended working out of the process of commercial logic within journalism as it enters its
next discursive phase" (Conboy 2004:181). Though we can see this transition both as a
function of PW' s increasing entertainment content as well as its unambiguous identity as
a profit-driven capitalistic enterprise, there are many factors which obscure a complete
analysis, not the least of which is a lack of in-depth ethnographic work which
satisfactorily addresses the reader's role in the interpretation and appropriation of texts.
To conclude, while it is fair to say that PW is less a site of 'alternative' media
production t than a more generic capitalistic organization which uses certain stylistic
tropes to appeal to a specific, if abstract, demographic readership, the implications for
this finding are less certain. Earlier theorists and commentators have focused on the
damaging aspects of the "commodification" of culture, equating the process with a form
of betrayal and misappropriation. Looking at this process from a different perspective,
however, allows us to see that commodification can in fact be a productive process which
increases media diversity and allows greater access to a larger number of participants.
Unfortunately, without an extended debate on the dense and contentious topic of the
evolution of capitalist modes of production and consumption in the 'complex' societies of
the 20th century, it is not possible to characterize the developmental trends of PW, nor
determine whether the neoliberal imperatives of capitalist production are destructive or
generative.
Additionally, further research to round out and evaluate the proposed processes of
production and consumption is needed to further distance ourselves from the three phase,

7

This term is multiply defined, but in Conboy's sense it refers to the rise of entertainment features and first
person style in publications, among other qualities.

55

mechanistic viewpoint which currently limits much of what is possible to say regarding
contemporary mass media. As we have seen above, the number of information sources is
multiplying at an exponential rate while media outlets, and print publications in
particular, are struggling to adapt to the new environment. Rather than refocus our
efforts to redefine and re-catalogue this quagmire of generic pitfalls, however, it may be
more prudent to reemphasize the subjective role of the consumer with regards to all
cultural production. By conducting wide ranging studies of the media consumption
habits and attitudes of groups of individuals with some time depth, it could finally be
possible to reconcile our limited conception of mass media with some form of social
reality.

56

Acknowledgements
The author is eternally grateful to the staff at Philadelphia Weekly for consistently
welcoming his inquiries and answering honestly and enthusiastically to every question,
no matter how stupid. Furthermore, this project would not have been possible without
the gracious support ofmy friends and family, as well as my advisor, Dr. John Jackson.
References
Adorno, Theodor W., and Anson G. Rabinobach
1975 Culture Industry Reconsidered. New German Critique 6:12-19.
Allan, Stu art
1999 News Culture. Milton Keynes: Open University Press.
Armstrong, David
1981 A Trumpet to Arms: Alternative Media in America. Los Angeles: Tarcher.
Anderson, Bonnie M.
2004 News Flash: Journalism, Infotainment, and the Bottom-Line Business of Broadcast
News. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Anderson, Benedict
1983 Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism.
New York: Verso.
Atton, Chris
1999a Alternative Media. London: Sage.
1999b A Reassessment of the Alternative Press. Media, Culture & Society.
21(1):51-76.
Association of Alternative Newsweeklies
2007 About AAN. Electronic Document,
http://aan.org/alternative/Aan/ViewPage?oid=2086, accessed February 20 2007.
Baum, Matthew A.
2002 Sex, Lies, and War: How Soft News Brings Foreign Policy to the
Inattentive Public. The American Political Science Review 96(1):91-109.
Bagdikian, Ben H
1997 The Media Monopoly. Boston: Beacon.
Bizot, Jean-Francois
2006 Free Press: Underground and Alternative Publications 1965-1975. New York:
Universe.

57

Bourdieu, Pierre
1998 On Television. New York: New Press.
Campbell, Vincent
2004 Information Age journalism: Journalism in an International Context. London:
Arnold, 2004.
Chomsky, N.
1988 Manufacturing Consent. New York: Pantheon.
Conboy, Martin
2004 Journalism: A Critical History. London: Sage.
2007 Permeation and Profusion: Popular Journalism in the New Millennium.
Journalism Studies 8(1):1-12.
Dahlgren, Peter
1992 Introduction. In Journalism and Popular Culture. Peter Dahlgren and Colin Sparks,
eds. Pp. 1-23. London: Sage.
Davila, Arlene
2002 Culture in the Ad World: Producing the Latin Look. In Media Worlds:
Anthropology on New Terrain. Faye D. Ginsberg, Lila Abu-Lughod and Brian
Larkin, eds. Pp. 264-280. Berkeley: University of California.
Dornfield, Barry
2002 Putting American Public Television Documentary in Its Places. In
Media Worlds: Anthropology on New Terrain. Faye D. Ginsberg, Lila AbuLughod and Brian Larkin, eds. Pp. 247-263. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Druckman, James N.
2001 The Implications of Framing Effects for Citizen Competence. Theme issue,
"Citizen Competence Revisited," Political Behavior 23(3):225-256.
Eliaspoh, N.
1997 Routines and the Making of Oppositional News. In Social Meanings ofNews: a
Text-Reader. Dan Berkowits, ed. Pp. 230-53. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Fenton, Tom
2005 Bad News: the Decline of Reporting, the Business of News, and the Danger to Us
All. New York: HarperCollins.
Frank, Thomas
1997a Liberation Marketing and the Culture Trust. In Conglomerates and the Media. Pp.

58

173-190. New York: New Press.
1997b Why Johnny Can't Dissent. In Commodify Your Dissent: Salvos from The
Baffler. Frank Thomas and Matt Weiler, eds. Pp. 31-45. New York: W.W.
Norton.
Fraser, Nancy
1992 Rethinking the Public Sphere: a Contribution to the Critique of Actually Existing
Democracy. In Habermas and the Public Sphere. Craig Calhoun, ed. Pp. 109-142.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Ganti, Tejaswini
2002 "And Yet My Heart Is Still Indian": The Bombay Film Industry and the (H)
Indianization of Hollywood." In Media Worlds: Anthropology on New Terrain.
Faye D. Ginsberg, Lila Abu-Lughod and Brian Larkin, eds. Pp. 281-300.
Berkeley: University of California.
Gentzkow, Matthew, and Jesse M. Shapiro
2006 What Drives Media Slant: Evidence from U.S. Daily Newspapers. Working paper.
13 Nov. 2006. 30 Nov. 2006. <http://ssrn.com/abstract=947640 >.
Gibbs, Patricia L.
2003 Alternative Things Considered: a Political Economic Analysis of Labour
Processes and Relations at a Honolulu Alternative Newspaper. Media, Culture &
Society. 25(5):587-605.
Ginsburg, Faye, Lila Abu-Lughod and Brian Larkin, eds.
2002 Introduction In Media Worlds: Anthropology on New Terrain. Pp. 1-36. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Gitlin, Todd
1983 Inside Primetime. New York: Pantheon.
Habennas, Jurgen
1989 The Structural Transformations of the Public Sphere. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Harcup, Tony
1998 There is no alternative: the Demise of the Alternative Local Newspaper. In
Making the Local News: Local Journalism in Context. Bob Franklin and
David Murphy, eds. London: Routledge.
2005 "I'm Doing This to Change the World": Journalism in Alternative and Mainstream
Media. Journalism Studies 6(3):361-374.
2006 The Alternative Local Press. In Local Journalism and Local Media: Making the
Local News. Bob Franklin, ed. London: Routledge.

59

Harvey, David
2006. A Brief History ofNeoliberalism.
Klein, Naomi
2002 No Logo: No Space, No Choice, No Jobs. New York: Picador.
Knipfel, Jim
2006 News and Columns. New York Press, February 1. Electronic Document,
http://www.nypress.com, accessed March 12 2007.
Kunelius, Risto
2006 Good Journalism: On the Evaluation Criteria of Some Interested and Experienced
Actors. Journalism Studies 7(5): 671-690.
Lippmann, Walter
1922 Public Opinion. New York: Harcourt.
Louw, Eric
2001 The Media and Cultural Production. London: Sage.
Mandel, Ruth
2002 A Marshall Plan of the Mind: The Political Economy of a Kazakh Soap Opera. In
Media Worlds: Anthropology on New Terrain. Faye D. Ginsberg, Lila AbuLughod and Brian Larkin, eds. Pp. 211-228. Berkeley: University of California.
McNair, Brian
2006 Cultural Chaos: Journalism, News and Power in a Globalised World. New York:
Routledge.
Min, InCheol
2004 Perceptions of the Audience by the Alternative Press Producers: a Case
Study of the Texas Observer. Media, Culture & Society 26(3):450-458.
New York Press
2006 Mailbox. New York Press, February 8. Electronic Document,
http~/w,vw.nypress.com, accessed March 12 2007.
Ornebring, Henrik and Anna Maria Jonsson.
2004 Tabloid Journalism and the Public Sphere: a Historical Perspective on Tabloid
Journalism. Journalism Studies 5(3):283-295.
Pedelty, Mark
1995 War Stories: The Culture of Foreign Correspondents. New York: Routledge.
Project for Excellence in Journalism

60

2006 Alternative Media Audience Trends: 2006 Annual Report. Electronic Document,
http://www.journalism.org, accessed December 1 2006.
Rodriguez, Clemencia
2001 Fissures in the Mediascape: an International Study of Citizens Media. Creskill:
Hampton Press.
Ruxton Media Group
2007 Newspapers: Philadelphia Weekly. Electronic Document,
http://www.ruxton.com/index.php?page=newspapers/philly&nav=navigation alt
&active=3, accessed March 3 2007.
Sparks, Colin
2000 Introduction: the Panic Over Tabloid News. In Tabloid Tales: Global Debates
Over Media Standards. Colin Sparks and John Tulloch, eds. Lanham: Rowan.
Silverstone, Roger
1985 Framing Science: The Making of a BBC Docwnentary. London: British Film
Institute.
Spitulnik, Debra.
1993 Anthropology and Mass Media. Annual Review of Anthropology 22:293-315.
Traber, Michael
1985 Alternative Journalism, Alternative Media. Communication Resource 7. London:
Warid Association for Christian Communication.
Williams, Raymond
1976 Keywords. London: Fontana.

61

Table of Figures
Figure I .I ............................................................................................. 63
Figure 1.2 ............................................................................................. 64
Figure 1.3 ............................................................................................. 65
Figure 1.4 ............................................................................................. 66
Figure 1.5 ............................................................................................. 67
Figure 2.1 ............................................................................................. 68
Figure 2.2 ............................................................................................. 69
Figure 3.1.. ........................................................................................... 70
Figure 3.2 ............................................................................................. 71
Figure 3.3 ............................................................................................. 72
Figure 3.4 ............................................................................................. 73
Figure 4 ............................................................................................... 74
Figure 5 ............................................................................................... 75

62

Figure 1.1- First Issue of the Distant Drummer, Philadelphia, November 1967

I_

1

~-~~-:~.;,, :~~~F-h_:~-~:::
ti\~
hi;..., l., 1'a), l - - ~ _ . iffl

t11te / Specter:

V~r's Dilemma

1:f

'

.

-..

t:

-.

~-~

63

Figure 1.2- Listings Page of the First Issue of the Distant Drummer

 ,,1.
.,' I
~ l

,
111
~ Mi~n _;a.r~ \

i ~frodU.~icm. to
;,''11l1)0AH-and:  __ ,
,a~ t!ie- ..9t_vk ~

\r~_!ihf!J( the ,
i~_r\_-aral. do

ie\.C\m~~ )51\ld~- and

i!j,!J.T-l_1)'.

, ,--

),I[

nit t!le'. i:.i-1,'i_n_~ . :,,'._

0

filiiir
Judge;111

:{ \,l~tJrJ_'fl(Ul, by !
da.p]1ic1t _by -,\loeri-:
a)\_ilr ~in Sh&~~,
'f:

"fn(!

1wTh:lv

s(<)_ ~'.'tp 1_ 'Ptl,,
n;, . P&~~Wfly nu_d

..

: A,;;ad.eiuy .of M>ili; c.,

''

'

;.", -:
t"~t:s ot _Christ

-t.t :_;/'I

th>r--,
fa1h_4:\."\>rk,"

I

1
,p- .. nu
~n- ~r.

qiu_~ic I Jtieh ~itt:
;.t.)-la'in::ro:int, 87:4 Urn-

6 4nd lb PH.



;.,

-+t1Jg:a.1t tl.1'.ff,

""'1'0_~1111111
:



1

1

i :-

St,

~

'\1 :~ rhll.(IIS:

-~r~
11:at.>e!

 J.11.11e<1~f~t AVp:,. l\tytl_Ktiwr;

!

)l;j':,\i~T' :'~9

'.c

'

_



. '
r; "rr,~~<llln' \:-puck, ''.!!S.m2.nSfit'"11t.foti1 )itup .tln1: Wa_:r,
ill C~t-t/1,t fvt_
'W<.t,1_.'k T tur:lj t"ally
l . .-;._dra!t:.
~t:lltd:
at th.e.
IJMpo~ic)'. talk$
, ic;,,,rllilln _J,lt) .Clllllffl\.lJ>ity _ _'
1_1 ],in .rt11f1U1l
1

.'~,n"". .

1.,nd 1,'h1iatn1ff
/

'.,

Chur,i;h at 13
st; 1j -l'Pr:,ttlby'~ti_rfon
l{;,_ G~ilen__ A~-'!ul.p#>ol<eri.i
0

, -Sts, .'l!tlt'ttier, det.i.11:s. frWli
'. th11 Ph{laidlll-Phti,, "Antl.<irll)ft-

,11~,np11r,_ ao

1 UlUort.)l(t6~653),

!

~: :st~u C-111ette:
dl)t Ha.in l>bl"ll.t.
1-&1<1 :t.o. PK; -a14

-Tifl)1n .6; (I





n' t k; Cl-aud_e Monet_. by
J.a'c"tj,u,1 l-i-1,i _1-1e1.a.ai, .H
,._-..J1us~um of A_'rt ,: I'a:rk\14y t
?'.11~~1'.l~'
,
01(
11-t"e: ioah.la.tt,; 1
.l)ex, ~t -l:_n1>t ,ii-.1\ht act
poipt tl"i4 Lantaut_et"_ A
l,, wr. -Sand 10,

t',

I"'.

\_o ilJl;~,;o:

of . rifon

11

ar_kli, ..

'ti~
(lilt. -TQ .. l~el>b. ~:,. \'
~e t:Uual f lt,1s.'.fa e.tery,
f,:40_.rl'M, Musa _, of, rt,
-rarl-: a)' Ami F
t

11:

io

Pl(, .

v_i Sh,:,.n}

t'H, :Ae_m

W~i

rou:4--ail.d, !,qi -

~wi_t

,1:114

jlt)'t\.';~'" 

.\

1ut

'ottl,

,

,

'

)
:

"'\

.,

: ' ..1.111t: t<t2lini,_ ~ "S '...I 2'.\.
,I d'IIA Fug:a'' at "ila dbbt,
s:~o n1 a._.o _ t:
1
t, ; - ,:,niantQ 
'

' ,1

.

I

"""I<
1.itt
",ft 8

.

ti:eeem e~ 16,\
I

t<i
S



fo; 1i



fi'th
ild,l

.,ht

,l &(ld_.f'.a(tlllOllnt .t.v~, 1 11 AM~

01~:Ii~1!::!1.

~1h

1

~r

i

1 11 -1_ St.r\,btoi--t)'_

'11

,;;iijin\t,_-~t. S)  1~

11,,_,}Ut Areh: .'

\

J'

au, ,ba
,_1

~

k~ f;lnd

64

uf!d It/
' &nd

dy~I

'

1

I . :(

'

?refber ZJ

C. __1.1a,f

Bk: P

,'~ltf J:'gifil:.

l S. R{t~enhou&e _Sq1,urre.
.
\ an tl~: 0niri Monn _1.hru
!(,~' 6-nO . uiil 6.n~
\ ~have_dt' 1>iJohn t, _Tf!.Ut:p,$
, lljllljdb;r,_x, .~o 1Aflllll~t1:a~_1'111a_dutt-1,"1J tn, l'ai.1<:r;r.1-y_
1

ii'"lWMI-, to
' !'hd "f<11.1r O~y11 _
, ~ll._ll-

! l

W$f-'. i,._tthW'.' 4nd
il.h_ame:~ as_ olfl l.11dy, ''
m,d ~ :, /:t_ rM.,j fuln_<Hi
Ar,i,at !. :, {rrnantof'

i:r-nit Ar,

l :

I

ierJ;ilboit l 

' ,w-:,' l!ra

'. Hl11u . !i11:,)aplll At

I

J

. \_

1:eetU1:A1 ''thll And- No'l-el.f'
, by R:o7!1'blt.n_,_tc.h-f-t at
j' the 'Frt_a:un.1_,;er_!!ityo_f
! I'enna~f.-arih. TaH. i~_ a:t:
The l!t!)foAl Soc_iety 1906

A~.., 1>r.i1'1'!4i"i',

- -

n ,A\/e;

0

~1)_11'~eU1lwr -4

st. 1

tl,

,

~M.-'

I

$

thp.rs ~f I
1: dar, J m tojthe1Tr.i
St11-nA. 11. 9 J'M, 212

1Jnd. :}:)O PH, Fr rik-

't_ :11ay Cha_rl!)$ _1,-n- _s.
onCert.at_ -the .Sp c_:..
l'.l:uld, St:. an_p.!lt "!W

,',

Zar,J,ai

i

l .)

e.

i'.:lml"")'

! Plleelflbet_ 9

it~:-._tti, t.it'-'!:,ll hte_t_ure
.iOi:;h-a_ d 'farlr.14ay,



\ (Olk mu. 1r.:_,'s.tf_l;if._ cn_hi-1;ti!_
".'.
'. r.i_l.Y..- r .t'. !:>: H.i!.in __P,:,_1. nt,
I hut: "t0i:1'1;Y is his---hat day,
Sh!J>-'fHC .il i:if!<1. 10 PM, __ <m

i

i. '
Deee~h? 126

lrvln... _.A d.iJ.4.t\i- an,d:S~\ut-e:

J., .....I: .,;f.:hth.t.11.r11r cJ1_ r''-

L) iJ7'ii,'i' ,n Ual\l;lhol-l, -J.il.,',rmBt.\
") St;..,_ C-e _11nt:()WT\.

Ae

:

l ,
I
.
~ : l'ehn'a :Ghe _Cl_t

;_l -t:11.du~,-).l_Ot:h and hrkw_ay_,
1
f!lm!''' _ 11_SPvl111,- llanilet"

~t1_,1t_y

1

,

first_ ren_Ye:au_ ::1n
I, Spuderke~
..ei,;_ 1.3 PM_. fels 'l>l.~r,r,-

~jltr, 1:l)l'.U

'

~-a-Ste:r f.ve,, BrfA 'Havr.

t11nvl.e:. ]1,J11.,'e_k pr)lheua,"
~l'MJ Ai)nD.niHlttl: _Audi} tor1u_ttt, :fni'l!\'!r(i-tt:, \\! PenJta

11'1/j.nd ru~,iy_,

..

'

f~~k

. '

llal<l,y i'flltlid_f!Y,Ti

,! n,t~ rt_an.-,-

.

4oa1.,!. !\re
" .""'.driake
l'lertorl
-at. ~h .. Tt{I
2Ul At: h-.,St., i 9 ;l'ff;

<tt'mnat -~l,)(ri. _Wil.ltp.JIIB.: fo
"D}'hn-fheimas. Gl'.'i:>-wtnl Up;''"
1:1:)0.PM,\ 1r;.,,1ne lu,1,lit'orillJli,
)~th il\'1; SJ\ju  Stll,

1,~11hts (~r~, H4

nee.11Wl,e;i,:-. ,a
'

;:$1t-filgh_t sh=~ :Sunahi a

','fle~i.Dtbl.rl'.. 1

he -l!:Jl_tllrritni!,r",
<>rnh. ti :Jil l'M
r\l -Sst~_rcdt;y,;,

...,

:I

I

I

'10~.11t--r."'__ atcie<I- ~t"il,..

fog~l_ight; ahev: StJ:.llwbfl-rry'
A1.11na Clo4k-(see t,a"ge 5) is
aJ the;- Ji;a~, Un,. ~ch St.

~_n,

!

 aa:.. lphia.-!)pat;a
"S..'.''.'. ~.' .'.COll!P
.vif D;i1
e.. "



&:l!i. _
_ e.i,_n~_ho)!._- )0 krnia_t_
-St~-- derttto~..
.

'll,{Jll1s ..

i'i

"1hY
_U:S,111\l\ll

f

tj-'

!f

Figure 1.3- The Distant Drummer, ca. 1979

,. .. .t.
tllS'I
MS

65

Figure 1.4- Listings Page from the Distant Drummer, ca. 1979

I

10~1

Wednesday 
MUSIC
,tohi:t. tlt&IZ at_ tti11_

Sud_lit;~mi

Br,1!14dlln,e_.Qafe,

102,.-$111.lllf ;$1, Media, 6-9 p;_m"5e8.cg9l1
Chl:~Cln w..t~~-JulW _Q()kl ll\ C4bar,1n, 1_s;N,
W&l_nvt St; W-est ChM!i,r, 4;Jalf.~ll.
1(1K1 'vtfflM1 -ll1- !ha Khfb#r Pll~ Pub, SIi S
2nd S!

-11~.

l

,,___1

ThursclaY.

~~-

O(.i._,nt: lff it1:e:$pec!n.1M, JI_

$Pit'
9-p"cTT!.,

f\llrlbow '11t--P"r1wtnk)4, 1 j_~ _ft_ 191t1 SI.

Tennk,'m1)(!td -O0\jbli, For smg..-, T11mt111
Too,. _3S;OO .Mafn' St, 7:3P. 12- .P J,L

Jiik: MoG'ar,n at _La 8tstro, 7,57fi'ont .St, f'U~.,

73855.

_1hua ~11.Qni;l<>l'l._2,:)ro eno Fat1mq1m1 Avenue

ttaltl Alierin~ci-Khybor Pan Pubisa s. ,2nd
s,
S-41l'$l1~4
Holly_ ~!At' 'lrilh J:T'. i ' h ~ 'prea&nl.ed,tiy
i:c_bo_-pr-oovctl(iflt nd WXPiN u&,i;!.rr;,-.-Ur1111.
al Pfl.l'\1'.1- -Ms.eum-aud. 33.rd-&;~!mJ_l;_,e; S~-

Brl9~" n_t_ 1ho Cilv. W<111 Oirmer The_atra,

shl:.W

A"'""1"BOIII
M~l11.

Soi;tt, th.,.923-5559,

Gn!;r1lt1 Rwn M&A,

ti.mo

.

l;nrirof'.m'Ml1.-1 K#t.idlWI:~ -at 7;30 P/TI,,
"Sh,erino !31ab(llA&&Qtl(611.5tht1)'.klll Valley

Mltlfi!

N;lurw t;:.nwr, 3_480 H1111f MIii R1t, -46;?,
7300
~i-1-(:lym -~1-1 HOU, a_1woo !).m., YM
YW.HA,, e~u.11d & Pino Sta,, t<l,S-411_0:(l, t,)I\, 2tl.
httr<l \0 BU:klJlfflm~ It We,~ fQN:hliJ,
WQ(kthOPll 11;! 9:3()- iun:., YWCA -~7 -Cri11&1

ioo, S-

J1Ut St.,, 1.J,)-3~;l(l,

$Wffi _tu.adwrv.oca1 JU1(:I lnstrmfientur avo at

lnl_~Jtonl-i:lal)e1fl9 11 1'.-p.m.,. -H,;:iu111m;Hal!.
l)qlvef~iy cf P1:hir)1Sylv11,nt~,- 34.lh & $p{v~e:St11.

SiJu11r I (IPPJle,tii.n -~ (::iic:i,, 1)11~_1'Q-_6.1

a p:,m.: St Mrlln),lnlhe-F,teldS,: WU/ow
GrQ,'ffl .+v11 & _SI, Mr_llJ,'.ll.al\8, 9ti~!,!I Hl!t

'Ave.,. Mo)Wmei)j Ad., -tle-7-0200.

---'-12------'-

Krawau, at Sb1r:;Jl(ln.11, 701_.s. 4QJ-.51, t~~:2'33$,

_:y.u.,

Wartu.n- s1,. !H.4,31150

flih

4

MU.SIC
1'hlt Ell Cl1lai10 QUllrliJI il1 \.II E!ttvp. 167
!"1Qrl/ _s1re_e.1, f1:J&,~65~
Tti.. JQ~ <:1,!'Ml'UO- _TrJt:i, .. h1_11tu(1J10 M11n111n
Btb_iif!I R11lftla~j'dff i\l -Lelf-a'Jirtk. 1n2_ 6

Th,f- A~_!'Uil~Ul.llirlll _s~_ty 111
Wa111u_l .\rL .,rn1111lf;f1 _r,11,-t(i, _1iv1L 9!h & ;
WmmJt 51!1 . 5143~,\l"O-

[

11 p=.m,.:Mairt9lf'$ Fln11h.01,1s.e_1;"11.v&ffl, CRy Un.ii

~~r :~~tt,,t. Ard)ll:1'gh &-_H'lirt,<,,111_l L10''"'~- C:M_,!

,~rj9_:1ufoq:111 -Hw -c0:tyj_".le p,nn_e, Tne.ii.li"<i;
4.2P:OCilv i,..,rie:/\Wl ._ _6_1~"~.QOO

Pftviit \J>'wil al .Wai'nut St  ThM.trn,

2021 -t
816ll'.

"Jr_ilih' l;ffinc_lnspist_ 8. pm  weiert~_oi.r Rt,i;tt,4

(;lyll. ~d 01,.11 i _me R1v11rf,on1 O(nni'ir
1-l\,t.sJ\ro1 Qe!d~af,i _Ai~ -J,I Poplar St" $;!'5

~Vt,, ".le

Roumi
Afu'Allf\ '

11,(

Friday
!-..1"_!14y ,._OF)!t Ctf!W ~l 0,rfll'!dtti'$ !,.t11t..{l0f

-

.W:S. ,-Kll_l_M\I:: 'Thi. "RoOlno- Rodtwt.'.At ,'10
P.m: a,ender,_ 41\r/sqq So:utti.-St.,.11:23.,sseo.

_Phll,.:J~.;;_"jJnffriio1.:,-a.t q:rb~d_ol'.11 la1,/56o

S01.1-H1.$J

AIU'iut;l,

POTPOURRI

-4(.t Maplaw(!od MIi!!, G6rment(n(tn,.9:30-p.m.,

,.m

Ttl.ba!fll, :O<il.flW!lt A>'t!,/Of f'9pl111 Si, 926-

TQOI).

MUSIC::

,.'L.1,1ri1.M1tkl-l,'fdt',,li.M~ 11.t-Tll)lorl c,111,

t&ai, _-n,

P01

A/<,(lt1_r0nt Dinner

:tt";
Ri'ljcqu,

CheS\~r. 436-,95119,

SPORTS

~ :C1HM-.at -Grendel'11 l.Alr,, ~00

~Ufti,:SJ;. _
~i.\yjj,11__i,d. ~bi - lit: .tlHf

4200 Clly.t_1n11 /We.', 6"194000

ca,- Olol-:i!t -Gabil[l!II. IS N W11;lnvU.'it., 'W-t11ll

Jin:!( McGnn at L~ erni,o. 757 f",oul St, FUtl:.JlfS5

t.M.-,

2nd, 92291\.?J

;., '

I

MU
w,...

Wt}cl :

ow

2125 i
C:-tll '.

521 '.,
. .w
P,m.

"'"'

P4tN.

i\lt1:

t'il'!ll' i
""'

~ggl:

Ui I :
Lf;lll'

THEATRE

&lttti I

Cht
Tti,. . .U,.r~ut .\t''-Y' t:ultw-#1 - ~ Ill
Watnur St.. T/)i!litf,'-t Th#ltlf\\i Fl!le.  9th .la

POTPOURRI

w:.amut s1_fi,, .5Tol-3S~.
A,i.rioI S~t - ~ at _Gr.1u1!\11 _AUri M.if,
M1:1t1111



_ __

.

__

,

 

SW-ul "to11t14cl!'f- 'i'C.Cll!-and-ln~tro_morHJII ,Q,- at
? /:1 ,-M~tt\Qtj';:flriho,,tso f1v11rn,_ CIIY:_ L"l_Ot!i
Av!:_, fMOJ1um11nt _Fh;L.-{>&t,p-200,'

t'"

_fih]_t. "EV~'Yon.;\i.( 8.p'.iii,)iillil1i .rq0,JJ;q:.
1>;1a1l):,S1 _. t,fa'riaylini., !\1~0:)()/J_

PflVilhl- uv ,It _wa,11')_11)
Wa!rtllt-Sl!I-. St,J-,"61).

.St,_ :Thel!lt~. 9iri

&



YfN:_ (;:.."I .T:llit_-' _11 Wll!t" You,-'at 1"1)'11'" A
Pla;tart :(t;f4 Ot,lancciy sf;, PE5;:0030i

V~-At r~~ 311_ Ja;foad:&.Spr,~e,$1,~ 

135-A-1~1.

Chai i

YI<>

Kra>1:
Rain :

Thti

Fftln_)
D11rl 
Zf'ld .. l

SPI

..,

66

4>,;,_,v, ,vi' t',jv>! 1y -;,i..,i """'-'F",

Mind"i!.~i:1:Body, f!_ncl VOiunteer

!iS:trngs,._:

>rj

lV,

t:'

g.
'
--.J

;,if~E-~_ti ~
.l~M.,nth ... .

00
en

.

"C

.. .

i

tfjfOl!Qb Mafc.h_.:Va_t!Ol-!~;tii:n~ ,and lo!?tlons. 215.67053.85.:

W_WVJJ1.~sJic_f!in911th;~rg{f!Y~l)tS
.::_=:-.:
At $?,:Rosalyo-Payn~Js-~r,ttllg-to~9_nijery;hefher she'._[[ ever:a~~ip:s'~e:h!!f,: -.: '.
Y,P,\J~ger, bf(lth_~r draw <! :n:e~_bri=ilth."l_ hcipe_l_ljve to:_' she-says Jrt:~ef:(:!tltt~f!!Q W~t '.
Oak. Lal'!e Jioma-~Yo~~veJo be Op_t!fnlstii:,!' HerOrother.MuirAiafil~Osa_9_lioro__ :
h~_be:_en ~~r:vlng ,a ll_te ~~hfurce ~lnce :198:f_fQr:ane_ged!y ?ct!_ng ~_sJO?~u_~-!l.\.lr[r\(J
_fui,~~-led ~orth,P,hl_lf'if,:bberv-mat re;-u!~~d-Jn_ :he mu~d,er _O,f~~~e'.?~fl~r_:s,~ff:' _'. ,
vl.l'.J!JanJu~g!Xir~nlY.17: WhM 1he_.criIT\e-_OCcu'rr:e~S a1,~Y5[~fnlarr{~t1cti!i(. 
1ni,,oc_ence. f:~d se_r)f_i;_ndng JU~{I(_ CJj~~!~ L\Duma_ll; said :~,w<!S~~(ti/1!~ b~.th_EL:
rnandatorv so,nten~.' _ciddf_~V- it','.Se?t)'.le_d,'~nr,j(ri H?_y.e we !1l~fltio:ri-~d.W~?e,s_m_a1~ "i _',
'_in -th~. ~l_(!g!e ofpust_!~e;Moi'i(h?_prga.m.tePfj_~~arl:hl)'lo_r~_P,$0:J1e~ rj~hts,a(j:fv_istJ"dlth TrustoJ1:~:eveflts_-examJnj~g J_rieq_41tres_in t_he cri_mlri~ljusticesystef11 _a_re_on
tap <1)!_ overtbwn'. Th,e_ Pi7"e-_dE~istaiJ_cearriv_es-at_the-e_nd: _ an il!~Marc~ 31_ a'.ln
,-,rer~nce "?t c_e_n_te,r:C~Y_'~-Bf'.Oati -~t_re_et'.Mrr!st_ry-t(e_aturl~ heavyY,'eights_Anq.e!<! .D,avls
an_d=Sist!r'Hel~PfeJ:ari)._But_ ofu1F~-~Mties_ s1unct w.ru111_whne too;'!!kf ~ ?9.~117_'
, r~d)n41ytt:1ftt1 20_ at freEf Ubratvthat:11 inclt!det_he work-Of Mtiti-Ala_mu:asagooro
who, 1_<1s_t his s!ster.1:te?:rd, wa5:t<!ng~1#11ng _!n',tne hole'' i~lt11ithe-Hou-w_ale.State
correct1ona1_1nsti~utlbn. for.iMlstimi_qii t::a!U!ig himseff by hfs lfil.Fl:l!y"c_f-!anqia~ name,
H_pw-nervy._ (Frank fiuJ1.Ii10)


'=_

_ _,_

_

_

_

,

__

1:1'

s
"C

i

th~

. ,::-':-.-

_::;---.-

__

trr.e~enza ~ilk "rpm,_$10,$,s."56
$__Sa,ji)tst;~--,_:_:--,
-i--"~:~' . _--:
~9-lif'P{ll!fre_.i_~~A>f;

-~-

_afrie~rt

Oi:ad_b)' Wedriesdav,Wo!rPat.~
"ilo)(,:stam ofJC'{f,.gpi;n:Si6'-$20._4t
({,.bl//St~

-,,

-

-~---,
_,
C[Elipiog Wee(ls:: Nwt!/lilS,'!i6ng
'fwml stJrigray, Tjil)othf~rt
_ori)pfet.:S{lm ~8,5,,_S:~&:

~ nimn

,Ar;J,l)OOri-M"YffJii0..9f!m;'Free,4,roO

-~k,I'\-~

-'.n!~nfiMai,-At&.

...,.,......,,
~------:-.'. , :-

fy(ote:Mii!li. pne~:SoM<mtll.'
SUlltOVJ::S-"'thll~~ts\!i-8p!l'l$14-;$16:.J:14~5l~

....,

~ !i:i a'.SP#fil.sl.lCahfd _Lad'V.~

_sPJl)_::$15: nwrui,towiu~.1!~
,bx';;_: ..- --

>__",- .-

f.11:111Mtt. 'PIS\Gl!lil, Damlr;ra,:Milri:Js
Ugl)t.'5:3_0_1i'm.3)l.llo'.G.ySJ; l\iit(llnmr_

~m,

.,..;~

.

Side Entrarn::e,SJ.lWa_/fil/[_st

~ , ; ..

:tt.Motf..,__

.i=:~3frrlt:~~-&S:S!wii!
~-~-i:~

:l'r.!nk:rti~~91)1!t:$5:f!81&!1sri5t,

-~
"p
N

0
0

--.J

Figure 2.1- Comparison of PW (left) and Contemporary Underground Newspaper (right)

68

Figure 2.2- Comparison of Contemporary Underground Paper (top) with PW (bottom)

69

Figure 3.1- Music Lineup by Back of the Book Editor

2/28

N11it1it,!
/il'J,u,e/

3/2 Fucked Up @ FUC (Mookle Lovepump)

3/6 the Thermals@ FUC (Gol<:lberg)
3/1 Golden Elall @ JEls (Wallen)
3/2 Scissor Sisters @ EF (Goldberg)

3/1 Dalek @JEls (Jean Luc)
3/2 Eddie Plllmieri @ Kimmel (Adler)
3/4 Nightingales @ JBs (Jennifer.Kelly)
3/6 Drake & Chroma @ WCL (Adler)

l111npp1i:

Chris McDavitt

o PEN ING RIF'F': Monotonix, AC/DC inspired riff
rock from Tel Aviv @ JBs 3/3

POWE"- OF SOUL:

New labels re-

releasing old soul

Hangin' Out His Onion: X
]!e11tU'f&: Clinic @ JBs (Rob Trucks)

Badmaster Records showcase @ JBs (Doug Wallen)

1-t'IJt

up

whf) ... Ooh, wee Tierra

sou lstress)

70

(Philly

Figure 3.2- Image Included with Music Lineup

71

Figure 3.3- Back of the Book lineup

.A+E 28
A+E COVER: Beer

A-UST
Baby Loves Disco
(Emily G)
Phllly Craft Beer Fest
(Jack)
Boxing and. Kickboxing (Jean Luc)
Intelligent Design on Trial ( Greg Halbrei.ch)

BDAYS
Giant Pinata at the. IGA (julie)
Hard Dan<:e Academy USA (Jack)
Mini M. Jordans try to catch atom'bombs with their ti,ngues (Roberta)
"TRUTH, ~USTICE, OR THE AMERlCAN WAY?" (Alexandra Chalat)

ON THE RADAR: superheroes
OUT OF TOWNER:
KIMEAGINE:

El Gatito
ART: as last week

STAGE: exciting stuff

FOOD SPREAD
REV1!lW (K.M. Henri)
Lush Life by Leah

WHAT pisses off THE bartender
Recipe:

72

Figure 3.4- Front of the Book Lineup

FRONT! INEIIP
.

.

Feb. 28: Chaka Fattah. (KG)
Home Insert
 Dirty archaeolow on lhdep~ndence Mall (SW) 1, 150
 Prometheus ra<;llo project in Kenya (JJT & GM) 1, 1SO

 Heartbreak at the Renalssanc.e fake (JS) 700

March 7: Top 1O Drug Corners in the City (SV)
Education Guide;

 Marching band reco!lec,tons (EP)
 Wagner Free Institute ofScience(JLR}

March 14: .Jose Garcia and the Philly-Mexico City Connection (KK)
 Homeless inPhilly (BM)

MarchZl:SPRING GUIDE:STREET GAMES

March 28: Jimmy Rollins (PP)

Apri!4:TK (CH)

April 11: TK (KG)

*pink will b" appearing Jn Philly March 27

73

>)

RAOAR

!Jl'lllll<;.pp!',l'),1<,. . '' ...   ..  .

Yon lm.owwool mean. HeIIBl!ds JJO ..
introduction. Yesterday heWajrth;:ria:.'.. -
h'!l'\)a ofPhilly cool, the super-gro;,vy
gosi;ipblogger, tliedn<le;i,hoputthe
"Ps," into hlpster. Tode;,.he's.snoton a
Cl'llcl<who,e'sst<icl<ing.. . <>C r
Hls crime~creillhility?In ahor- 
rlfieally liadlyjuilged 1'lwa4ilpbi~ irlag)\zine advertorial; tlie god-king posed in
the back <if" "free" call,,-.ridictilously
resplendent in his trruleiarkrn;,nic
girl's coat _aD.dilnt;~irofilc.'no,-sex
specs-andgus1ied abollt his 
l"'nsors'.wadnets tpo to w,,-w.
philadeld
m..
goey ew.ms,~ - .. :.--' ,., ..
WeJl,ltbetroyed.,'lta:hbed
th,;-ough tlie 1iciiil- Jesns.n.evei:
shfiloo. Che~)IE!Vffl'. ...
suelred corj,oral;e~ But .
. perlrap,rweshtfuldn'thaveh~
.sh!,cl<ed.The god,l<;itrgb:~ .
has aJ,i\,11;"' be<n, 'l!.ealnfeil'<npt 

.Real Life Is .No1' Fllgaai .
Philly hipsterdomjumpslhe shark. 

C.



It's beerra rough fuvweeks for hipsters.
Hugh: Barker And 'l'irntl Tuylor~a
LarryWeat~Philadelphi,{s !Mhawked  hrulal ill:tack on.~pniressor
~ calididate' for mayor,-appea:red   David Lowetbal caJled the dogon the;fro)!t <mer ofthe Metroiialci;d
maofs"1-dolusion,whmhhasiand J)l'iapie, waving a harulg#n !!.lid
l'!illy ldlls the enme concept of
 scteallling hls plan to replacethe city's 
authenlie" alternative culture,
with wb!i>-wieldi satanlc cheer- el\lS .il;;shitsit, J,uries it, digs it
,..~,,_'~r<laJ;sitand
'''' ',' '' '. ' y t ' ~ . ::f""""hedidn\.
"""""7,r, ,'
'. ,'
'; '' ,,_, >,. ,_,._, ' ....shi.tsit
He wore asuit. And ,wffled on ahout
o\!tllgilin.And then nailsit to
prtl,lic access TV.Hey ho. .
.
a anvaiiand !"'!ls it art. .
We've.also
tlieprtblwmonof thtee
;1;mterulto'ci!riytliis !ast .
boob that rip pnnk'sheatt out and beat  popk~witkme.And
it to death with a.stn 1'iwkM:id<et/ng: . . tlifnrti:tfinie1~.;-ro w)ro
Getpl[Yonr.Assan/f;TointbeBe~~ ..,.;iill,h~J:hlgl,O,e.ahontto ... 
. jsexactlYwbat it ~(inds)ll;; and~';<. . usotllii
 f a i l ~ .8al,yfonsBu.imilgby.CliJIC ;lsh.0:~himin.t;h<ilJ#lid t '
tbn.Heylin tcllstliestQryofalterrui~[ witblt,~. ; C,
rock,frompmil<to n e.Andl<;icltjl>
,;Mi<lcifallthis~en
seten shades 9fsat~
m.itof.~liii!
t<iliiealt ihe
ro;:ldcons tlie Clash as it does so.
j,uled 

Andthenthere's~lt:Tii~~

for AJJfbeJitieityin Pqp,;Iar Ma.,icby

.l'W~~~. ~;#l;'

=~Tot.all --~"

_,
_,.

seen

~~i!:~,.,.

.tit

Fug;,zi" (Fuga,:ibein,g;;punls

b,i,,:l from, a my long tiyw "Ill'
that bad pPliti,cs;,iJd ptmclples
and shitlJlre that). . . .  . . . . .
. And you know what? Itliinkthe
god-kinglsnght;R.;.i!Jffi,ill not ..

1u,atthreven

Futazi, Real.life ~oh J,;tmetliink
now. Wait, I have it.
Real life is K1fed. 

m,-+g-5
::i--8 <
f-03
~
-~~

v:

N 3 "'O .-+ Q o
"'
:,"
C :0N7~ (-t ) (
t )"< ~

0

0

-

ac:

"Tl

l:I1
-
c,.. (Jq

~

~: C:

o

{/l-J

~ Q (6
ri>oe;,...,.~c:~ ::r
.j:;:..
Oo ~UlOQUl

--:i::;-(t):1'"~,...,.o
~

=

:,-

I

Figure 5- Black Like Me Column from February 14-20 2007 issue

~z>;A,I&.g,1. st'Ajt,.E '"'''

';, ,::_,_-,;. _.: _,,>/ ..,.' ','::

:,.:,-::- .- .-'~ , ,'\\:-i'~

'

m~ ..... 

iv.\i-11y 1~ay Onto you whit.e.women

l.~jBLA . 
i::LlKE'
II::...    . .  .. ME

f Atiierica: stay white. lt'spretty to

 PJ~ Qpd .qidn't Rlac~ yourra.ce
 f!Way up inthe mountains and
of ~l!rope so you can look like an
ge lollipop rn an Hl;M Nbe top.
resuppQsed to.beruno.lng.tpe
dalqngs!de yourmenfol~,and lt'.s
~ toryou to start looking fl~ enough
.. rink. merlot from .the1kulis qtthe

i  .... . ..

ili.Uetters~Philad1lphiaweekly,cilm

ffii'l'h~lotOra~~~
. 
i[: Ll,r~~:Stpfd.. lt's a ploy.~niu~d

UP

Rit,lil'tli!ifllumJnali who runearthfrom

 e~racesthat'vefaJlenbllfqr~ your
,;ti on. Only an 4ndvi1izedbut-

.

fililtne Hubbl~Telescope.These evil. .
!li m,isl:lirinlnds devised th9.concepl of

;!ifromantic (ove to get men to buy !heir
)11Jovers rings containing qiamoods from
i+ conflict-ridden ar~as of /\frlca, thus

upporiiogthefurthersiJbjug91i?n and
 ventual annihilationof th.eblack race,

w,,
Laura

e,.f'luUyccloudon-ia-springday

. WhlleValentine's..Pay[l]~yg~a
lilr cause for ceie.bratlon ln the
Jtdriesn;\ meaj,$hit inl,frica,

Wouldthink a.McDonalo's doesn't
g lnMogadishu.
, beforeJforget; white ladles,
're alsofucklng with us niggas
like our wh.lte womel} white. 
Ingalls WUder whlte, Bj<irk

. lt'shar~for us to lust after a
an galwl\olooks like a Dragon

.

'.Z-.character;

~ilfggasis dodgJM bazoo.kas and
J:; so some dude 9n this end oft he
I.oil~ can get his peepee lellated by
is"overtanned, orartgeskinneq bimbo.
ue to his Qf1lat lqtkyJa;;te in gifts, .
Also, when .didit becom'eattrlldiVe

rwhitewo.men to tantMms~lvesto\:, 

 p\llntofturnlng.ttieir skin orange? 
ere any race on this planet !hat's
ge 1~.nalure? Maype Italians, bI

're.more.v.inill~puddingc;o,loretj.
en when I backtrack through 1)1Y .
efatihlldtiood 111e111ori.es (more...

s<... this Jn the tut~r:e/..i~Q'fre~~l!ai
'Wcartoon character thatcwas orange.
l;!,;:~o,wutthadi!ly, ladies? 1ihls whole

1il(Qr<1ngeskin~ed white-woman shit Is
/i;iiJQ~lunsettllng.

75

,   . . .

 .

h:rwrap this u~ It's gree;tfo be
 Whitelikethe:clean dishes ..
\ipboardl. Yo~rfqCe created
and concrete. Don't trade those
hl)in\f!n.!o look "11xotl.c" or 
tli.i~g,.Y1>1.;JstJRQ~. s~~rv.to me,
mtoo i>lq tg b~ 
 

