University of Pennsylvania

ScholarlyCommons
Anthropology Senior Theses

Department of Anthropology

Spring 2007

The Social Context of Legislating N.A.G.P.R.A.
Barbara Clare Tarpey

Follow this and additional works at: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses

Recommended Citation
Tarpey, Barbara Clare, "The Social Context of Legislating N.A.G.P.R.A." (2007). Anthropology Senior
Theses. Paper 79.

This paper is posted at ScholarlyCommons. https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/79
For more information, please contact repository@pobox.upenn.edu.

The Social Context of Legislating N.A.G.P.R.A.

This thesis or dissertation is available at ScholarlyCommons: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/79

THE SOCIAL CONTEXT OF LEGISLATING N.A.G.P.R.A.
By
Barbara Clare Tarpey

Senior Thesis in Anthropology

Submitted to the
Department of Anthropology
University of Pennsylvania
Thesis Advisor: Robert Preucel

2007

Abstract
The Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act is a groundbreaking
piece of legislation. However, the law was sharply contested prior to its passage in 1990.
An examination of how professional academic societies, museum institutions, federal
institutions, Native American groups, and individuals interacted during the late 1980s and
1990s reveals several rhetorical strategies that were used to sway opinions of other actors
in negotiating the language of the law. This research contributes to awareness of the
anthropological and archaeological communities vis-a-vis repatriation legislation,
especially concerning if, or how, attitudes towards repatriation legislation change over
time.

1

Table of Contents

Chapter 1. Introduction
Chapter 2. A Short Legal Background: Laws and Human Remains in the United
States
Chapter 3. NAGPRA in Brief
a) Outline
b) Significance of provisions
Chapter 4. Historical Context
a) Native Americans and Federal Indian Law
b) Changes in Archaeology and Social Theory
Chapter 5. Getting to NAGPRA
a) Early rumblings
b) Tribal requests and state laws
c) Individual Archaeologists
d) Pan-Indian activism
e) Congress and Federal Legislation
t) Working Together
Chapter 6. Motivation and Discourse
a) Personal and Impersonal
b) Rights and Constitutionality
Chapter 7. Conclusions

2

Chapter 1
Introduction

On November 16, 1990, President George H.W. Bush signed his name to Public
Law IO 1-60 I, creating the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act.
Hailed as a watershed moment for Native American rights, NAGPRA, as the act is
popularly known, was the culmination of years of work by Native American individuals,
tribes, organizations, academics, professional organizations, and the museum community.
While the Act has provisions for the excavation of Native American sites and the
protection of sacred and burial places, the most highly contested section ofNAGPRA is
repatriation, which is the focus here. Repatriation, or the return of human remains and
artifacts, involves a multitude of stakeholders and interests. NAGPRA mandates that all
federally funded institutions must follow certain guidelines to inventory, make public,
and review requests to repatriation collections of Native American human remains and
artifacts. This requires the involvement of museum and university trustees and staff,
professional anthropologist, archaeologists, and federally recognized Native American
tribes. In the drafting and negotiating processes that occurred before the final draft of the
bill, all of these stakeholders vied to represent their best interests through meetings,
resolutions, coalitions, congressional testimonies and hearings, and in the news media
and in the public eye.
The creation ofNAGPRA is embedded within an historical and social context that
must be explored to uuderstand the reasons and timing of the legislation, as well as the
motivations of the various stakeholders who negotiated over the bill. The broad context

3
of the acknowledgement ofNative American rights, the history of museum collection
practices, developments within academia inform the specific actions of individuals and
events that catalyzed the creation and passage ofNAGPRA. Discourse about repatriation
from various points of view has converged over the process of drafting the law, as can be
seen in joint statements to Congress, reports in news media, and works from within
academia and the museum community. The prevailing inertia of many of the professional
anthropological and archaeological organizations and museums has been partially
alleviated, as widely held fears concerning loss of collections has not come to pass.
In my thesis, I examine how professional academic societies, museum
institutions, federal institutions, Native American groups, and individuals interacted
during the late 1980s and 1990s. I focus particularly on the rhetorical strategies that were
used to sway opinions of other actors in negotiating the language of the law. This
research contributes to awareness of the anthropological and archaeological communities
vis-a-vis repatriation legislation, especially concerning if, or how, attitudes towards
repatriation legislation change over time. My analysis of the interrelationships of
NAGPRA and archaeology reveals that archaeology can be conceived as "culture" in the
cultural anthropological sense of culture as a contested process of meaning making and
that this process is ongoing.

4

Chapter2
A Short Legal Background: Laws and Human Remains in the United States
It is useful to begin with an overview of the laws treating human remains and the

dead in the United States. Anthropologically, law is a subject of interest because "it is not
separate from culture but is an integral part of culture" (Delaney, 2001, p. 489). Law
draws up categories, such as "body," "nature," and "property." It matters where the lines
of each category are drawn, as well as how they are applied to people and the material
world. A large and legitimate grievance in the discourse surrounding repatriation is the
inequality faced by Native Americans. In terms of the court decisions and statutes that
regulate the dead body, historical discrimination against minority and disempowered
populations has manifested itself despite the idealized profession of equality under the
rule oflaw.
This discrimination extends to the treatment of human remains, which have been
the subjects of legislation over the last two hundred and thirty years: distinct laws and
regulations at the federal and state levels largely stem from the English Common Law
tradition. In particular, American rulings and laws concerning human remains have
focused on the rights and wishes of survivors such as the next-of-kin, and the degree to
which this groups is politically marginalized or empowered is reflected in the application
of law. An historical analysis of court rulings and statutes over the disposition of human
remains reveals continuity in American society regarding the role of the next-of-kin, as
seen through changes in the legislation and the disposition of archaeological resources.
These laws and practices contrast with treatment of some Native American remains, as
state-sponsored and privately-funded collecting resulted in differential treatment.

5
Arguments for NAGRA that center on the rectification of historic wrongdoing hinge on
the discrepancy between the law and its application to more powerful groups in American
society and its application to subalterns.
Across all human cultures, argue scholars of human rights advocating on human
remains issues, there are general levels of respect accorded to the remains of deceased
humans (Hubert & Fforde 2002; Moore 1987). However, it is important to remember that
the "treatment of the dead is a cultural entity and the 'proper' treatment at any given
place and time is culturally determined" (Goldstein & Kintigh 1990:586). In the United
States, jurisprudence concerning human remains reflects the importance of specific
rituals for the dead, and was initially based on English, Enlightenment, and Protestant
ideas concerning death and the body.
American law is in part based on the English Common Law tradition. Most
reviews of American law and dead bodies begin their analysis with the pre-Reformation
era in England, when "the Church and the ecclesiastic courts exercised jurisdiction over
matters involving dead bodies"(Meyers 1990:183; Columbia Law Review 1905; Van de
Kamp 1990). In the seventeenth century, burial of dead bodies were in nullius bonis, or
beyond human property interest, due to the fact that interment belonged to the category

res relisiosae, or things inherently sacred. This put the buried body firmly out of the hand
of the general law of property and into the hands of the English ecclesiastical courts (J. F.

H. 1926; Meyers 1990; Van de Kamp 1990). After the Reformation, during the
seventeenth century, the secular courts began to take jurisdiction over matters previously
subject to the ecclesiastical courts. However, the notion that a corpse was res nullius was
continued, and, indeed, the American common law tradition upholds that the next of kin

6

have only "a right of possession/or the purpose of burial" (Meyers 1990: 183, emphasis
added). Early American courts upheld the principle that no property interests exist in
human remains: the person taking charge of the body merely held it in trust for those with
an interest in the body, i.e. family and friends.
However, American courts departed from the English Common Law in finding
"quasi-property rights" in dead bodies in 1872, in Pierce v. Proprietors of Swan Point

Cemetery (Harvard Law Review, 1896:51 ). Importantly, this quasi-property right is
extinguished upon burial or cremation of the body (Swain & Marusyk, 1990, p. 12). In a
second contemporary case, Larson v. Chase, the surviving spouse was deemed to have a
right of possession of the corpse of his or her spouse, "in the same condition as when
death occurred, for the purpose of giving it proper care and burial" (Harvard Law

Review, 1896, p. 52). Exceptions are made for autopsies deemed necessary by the state
(Meyers, 1990, p. 184). Seventy years later, courts also ruled in State v. Bradbury (1939)
that the disposal of a body by the next of kin in a manner deemed contra bonos mores
(against common decency), was a common law misdemeanor based on the "subsequent
effect of the act upon the community" (Harvard Law Review, 1940, p. 1048). Through
the expansion of common law jurisdiction the courts prosecuted Bradbury for a
misdemeanor that would otherwise have broken no laws - it was simply shocking to the
community. While American courts expanded the rights that can be claimed in a dead
body, adding the idea of quasi-property rights, an emphasis remains upon the "duties" of
next-of-kin and a sense of community propriety in the treatment of remains.
Once a body is buried or cremated, however, next-of-kin no longer hold any
rights in the body. In fact, the state then "exercises a protective function over [the body]

7

against unauthorized removal" (Meyers, 1990, p. 186), and unauthorized removal can be
punished in criminal courts (Meyers, 1990, p. 186; Sappol, 2002; Van de Kamp, 1990).
In fact, "no known English or American decision or statute appears ever to have
recognized title in anyone to interred or disinterred human remains" (Van de Kamp,
1990). American laws regarding dead bodies are in part based on assumptions of value,
invested in both goods and morals, shared by the entire community. Kin have "rights" or
"quasi-property rights" or "sacred duties" in the eyes of the community, and this is what
is written into law.
In sum, it has been the opinion of American courts that the next-of-kin have a
"sacred duty" to bury or otherwise dispose of the body of kin in a manner acceptable to
the moral standards of the community. Additionally, the next-of-kin have a quasiproperty right to an undamaged body, and hold the body in trust until the act of burial or
cremation. After burial, it is the state that protects bodies from unlawful removal. In court
and in everyday language, it is respect for the actions and wishes of survivors and the
approbation of the community that guides American legal interpretation surrounding dead
bodies. These points are illuminating when considering the disposition of human remains
categorized as archaeological resources and the history of discrimination evident in the
practice of collection the remains of Native Americans, which manages to violate all the
principles enumerated above.
Van de Kamp (1990) writes, "The proposition appears universally to be accepted
that human interments are fundamentally inviolate" in American jurisprudence, and
"disinterment and disposition of human remains is governed strictly by statute."
However, many statutes named allow ownership in Native American human remains, and

8
"the legal protections-which most Americans take for granted-have failed to protect
the graves and the dead of Native people" (Trope & Echo-Hawk, 2000, p.125). It has
long been established that the next-of-kin can recover damages for "any outrage,
indecency, or injury were caused to the body of the deceased" and that the damages stem
from "emotional interests connected with the dignity of the disposition of the body and ...
peace of mind [of the next of kin]" (Meyers, 1990, p. 184). Yet this protection has not
always been extended towards Native Americans.
The beginning of the twentieth century saw the creation of laws that began a
legislated century-long federal "ownership" ofNative human remains. In 1906 the
Antiquities Act was passed, with the immediate purpose of protecting archaeological sites
on public land in the form of parks and national monuments. However, the Antiquities
Act ushered in an era of viewing archaeological finds the property of the federal
government. The act specifies that "archaeological resources," including human remains,
should be turned over to state and federal museums (Sockbeson, 1990, p. 2). However,
the common law rules applying to burial grounds undermine the basis for granting
excavated human remains to museums. Under regular common law of property, there
exists a doctrine of abandonment that allows landowners the rights to objects and
resources on their property. However, because bodies are res nulliae, and no one can
have property interest in a body, abandonment cannot apply to burial grounds and even
when the identity of a burial ground is forgotten or lost, for "the obligation continues not
to desecrate the graves or dishonor the dead" (Moore, 1987, p. 5). Even if remains are
discovered on public land, or in federal parks or monuments, the original treaties drawn
between the United States and Native American tribes covering these lands do not grant

9

any right to bodies to the government; no treaty expressly grants rights to bodies, and the
general interpretation of treaties is that they are "a grant of rights from Indian tribes to the
United States; not as a grant to tribes. Rights not expressly granted are reserved" (Moore,
1987, p. 6, emphasis in original). The right of the United States government to exhume,
or exhume and store or display indefinitely, Native American human remains is thus
contestable.
Not until the latter half of the twentieth century did bills pass that affected the
Antiquities Act. In I 960, the Reservoir Salvage Act, which allows for archaeological
excavations of lands prior to the construction of dams, continued the presumption of
federal ownership of human remains begun with the Antiquities Act of 1906. The
language of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 seemed to slightly ameliorate
the practices of the previous sixty years, but Moore (1987) writes that it "results in little
real substantive change in terms of protecting burial sites" (p. 3). The presumption of
federal ownership continued with the Archaeological Resources Protection Act [ARPA]
of 1979, which at least provided a mechanism for tribes to consult with archaeologists
before excavations begin, and a permitting system for land under the control of tribes or
individuals.
Nine years later, the inviolability of Native burial grounds was tested decisively in
court: in 1986, the case Charrier v. Bell was heard by the Louisiana Court of Appeals.
The Tunica Biloxi Tribe claimed rightful ownership of material excavated from private
land, and the Court of Appeals ruled against the private landowner, for the "common law
doctrine of abandonment did not apply to burial materials" (Moore, 1987, p. 5). This
ruling occurred in the same year that Senator John Melcher introduced S. 2952, the first

10
bill to address Native concerns about the disposition of human remains classified as
archaeological resources (Sockbeson, 1990, p. 3). The bill began a four-year-long process
of creating a federal-level piece of legislation to address human remains, culminating in
the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act, 1990.

11

Chapter 3
NAGPRA in Brief
Outline of Public Law JO 1-60 I

Before considering the multifaceted process of the creation ofNAGPRA, it is
important to understand the major provisions of the legislation. The final bill, signed into
law November 1990, was the attempt of Congress to reconcile four major areas of federal
law: civil rights, Indian law, property law, and administrative law.
The act has fifteen sections, and is only ten pages long. It defines key terms
(Sections I and 2), such as: burial site; cultural affiliation; cultural items including
associated funerary objects, unassociated funerary objects, sacred objects, and cultural
patrimony; federal agents and federal lands; Indian tribe; museum; Native American;
Native Hawaiian; right of possession; tribal lands (U.S. Congress 1990). The choice of
language in the terms themselves and the definitions were contested elements in the
drafts of the bill. The third section, "Ownership", ownership or control of cultural items
(including human remains) is vested in lineal descendants, tribes on whose land the
objects were found, tribes with cultural affiliation proved with "the preponderance of the
evidence", tribes who previously occupied the land on which the objects were found, and
in the case of unclaimed cultural items a reviews committee of Native Americans and the
scientific and museum communities is established to determine disposal. This section
also covers the intentional excavation of Native American human remains, which must be
undertaken in accordance with the Archaeological Resources Protection Act of 1979 and
with the consult (federal lands) or consent (tribal lands) of appropriate Native American

12
tribes. If human remains or cultural items are inadvertently discovered, then the Secretary
of the Interior must be notified and cease any development activity until notified by the
Secretary or appropriate Native American tribes.
Section four covers illegal trafficking, and bolsters the extant law by amendment
with fines and possible imprisonment for knowingly selling, purchasing, using for profit,
or transporting for sale or profit any Native American cultural items without right of
possession or in violation ofNAGPRA.
Section five outlines the inventory requirement for federal agencies and museum
holding human remains and associated funerary objects. Originally scheduled to be
completed in five years, most institutions were given extensions in order to adequately
meet the requirements. While this inventory process requires determining cultural
affiliation of all Native American collections in federally funded institutions, it is not
license for "the initiation of new scientific studies" (U.S. Congress 1990, p. 3053). Six
months after inventory completion, the culturally affiliated tribes must be notified in
writing and the inventory must be published to the Federal Register. Indian Tribes are
also allowed access to records kept by museums about the acquisition of the objects.
Section six outlines a similar process of summary for unassociated funerary objects,
sacred objects, and objects of cultural patrimony.
Section seven treats repatriation. After establishing cultural affiliation, institutions
"shall expeditiously return" cultural items to requesting tribes, and human remains and
associated funerary objects to lineal descendants or tribes. If the objects or remains are
part of an "indispensable" scientific study "of major benefit to the United States" then
they are to be returned 90 days after the study finishes. Native Americans can also prove

13
that institutions do not have the right of possession and thus repatriate items or remains.
Institutions must share knowledge with tribes during the process. This section also
relieves museums from liability for claims that they breached "fiduciary duty, public
trust, or violations of state laws" (p. 3055).
Section eight establishes the review committee. The committee, of Native
Americans, scientists, and museum personnel, monitors and reviews disputed claims.
Sections nine through fifteen outline civil penalties for museum non-compliance, grants
for assisting tribes and museums, states the unique relationship between the U.S. and
Indian tribes, and outlines regulations, authorization of appropriations, and enforcement.

Significance of Provisions
NAGPRA is an extension of several of the provisions of the National Museum of
the American Indian Act [NMAIAJ of 1989. This act created a new arm of the
Smithsonian, the National Museum of the American Indian, out of collections acquired
from the Heye Foundation's Museum of the American Indian in New York City. The
NMAIA includes a requirement for the Smithsonian to repatriate human remains and
cultural items using a similar formula to that later used in NA GPRA, which extended the
requirement to all institutions receiving federal funding-about 700 across the United
States (Fine-Dare, 2002:119)-although some have said that "most" of the 8,000
museums across the United States will be affected (Thornton 1998:399). The NMAIA
addresses Native American human remains and funerary objects in the Smithsonian's
collection and outlines a process of inventory, notification, and repatriation, setting the
precedent for NAGPRA (Trope and Echo-Hawk, 2000: 137). The NMAIA, in tum, was
the product of preceding bills, all at the state level, which treat repatriation and the

14
protection of burial sites: the two most commonly cited as inspirations for federal
legislation are the Kansas repatriation law and that of Nebraska (Trope and Echo-Hawk
2000:134).
NAGPRA is broadly seen, through inclusion of Natives at many levels in the
process of repatriation and consultation, as well as the fact of a repatriation bill in itself,
to be a partial rectification of wrongs, both historical and current. Trope and Echo-Hawk,
both lawyers for the Native American Rights Fund, and who were instrumental in the
crafting of the NAGPRA law, hold that the legislative intent ofNAGPRA is human
rights: in a parallel to Civil Rights legislation, NAGPRA is based on a doctrine of trust
insofar as Congress' dealings with Indian affairs "are to be liberally construed for Indian
benefit" (2000:140). Watkins (2000:50) echoes Trope and Echo-Hawk, citing NAGPRA
as primarily human rights law as well as important for the deterrence of amateur
pothunters and private collectors.
Aside from repatriation, NAGPRA is also significant for its recognition of the
communal property of Native American tribes, a notion that runs contrary to most
property law yet is a well-established tradition of many indigenous groups. As McKeown
remarks ofrepatriation and the recognition of communal property: "Neither idea is very
new, both reflecting the guarantee of equal protection under the law imagined by
America's founding fathers and codified in the Constitution of the United States"
(2002:128). Henry Sockbeson, another staff lawyer at NARF, wrote just after the passage
ofNAGPRA that it "represents a major federal shift away from viewing Native American
human remains as 'archaeological resources' or 'federal property' alone" (1990:2).

15
Overall, NAGPRA is a means of reconciling four major areas of law: civil rights
legislation, Native American law, property law, and administrative law. Congress
recognized the differential treatment to which Native Americans were subject, recognized
tribal sovereignty, clarified the "unique status of the dead" and recognized the failure to
recognize communal property, and directed the Department of the Interior to implement
the mandate and regulations of due process (McKeown 2002: 108-109). The first three of
these areas have been the subjects of historical neglect.
The historical context of Native American law is crucial for its understanding.
Native American law is "perhaps the most historically dependent of all areas of
constitutional interpretation" for it "grows from, and is merged into, the historical
experience" (Strickland 1998:254). IfNAGPRA represents a major federal shift, and if
equal protection under the law is now only being guaranteed, an introduction to the
historical discrimination experienced by Native Americans is warranted.

16

Chapter 4
Historical Context
Native Americans and Federal Indian Law
The U.S. treatment of Native Americans in court and in Congress breaks down
into five historical periods, with NAGPRA falling into the fifth and current period.
Following Strickland (1998), these five period are:

I. Formative or Treaty Era, 1789-1871
2. Period of Assimilation and Allotment, 1871-1928
3. Time of Reorganization and Re-establishment, 1928-1942
4. Termination Movement, 1943-1961
5. Era of Self-Determination and Tribal Revitalization, 1961-Present
Many authors (Fine-Dare 2002; Bieder 2000; Hinsley 2000; Watkins 2000) treat the
discriminatory practices leveled at Native Americans over the centuries since European
contact, so only a brief overview will be addressed here.
The first of Strickland's eras, from the late eighteenth through most of the
nineteenth centuries, was marked by a distinctive philosophical view of Native
Americans that has informed federal policy and public opinion to this day. Based on the
rationality principles of the Enlightenment, with thinkers such as Thomas Jefferson and
Count Buffon witnessing and unfavorably judging Native American versus European
culture, representations of Native Americans "articulated social agendas" such as the
political ordering of European above non-European (Bieder 2000:19-22; Fine-Dare
2002:20). The study of"Man" in the nineteenth century centered on scientific principles

17
with the categorizing of the body (across cultures) as a specimen subject to the medical
gaze and a fascination with measuring. Samuel Morton's Crania Americana and the
popular pseudo-science of phrenology drove an evaluation ofNative Americans as
inferior (Bieder 2000:23).
A Spencerian vein in archaeology and musewn collecting informed many of the
practices of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries toward Native Americans. Belief
in unilinear evolution of societies also led white Americans to characterize Native
American societies "as static cultures at a relatively primitive stage of development
compared with European civilization" (Ferguson 1996:64), and that they would perish in
competition with European-American culture. The prevalent belief that the Indians were
dying out, called the "Myth of the Vanishing Indian", spurred the rapid and rampant
collection of human remains and artifacts across the United States (Weaver 1997:14;
Ferguson 1996:64). Museums engaged in "wars" to out-collect one another. A corollary
of this rush to preserve a dying race was the unethical and often illegal acquisition of
remains and objects. While many items were purchased, unscrupulous activity did occur.
In the literature treating this period, one frequently quoted incident is that of Franz Boas
himself despairing of the "unpleasantness" of grave-robbing in the face of his utmost
belief that someone had to do it (Fine-Dare 2002:41).
A larger context of empire building and Manifest Destiny informs the practices of
archaeologists of this period (Watkins 2000:5), who, with the dehistorization,
commodification, and objectification of Native Americans and Native American culture
engaged in a musewn process which "constructed a meaning of Indian demise within the
teleology of Manifest Destiny" (Fine-Dare 2002:13, 21). Complicit in the collecting

18
practices was the federal government itself, as the Army Medical Corps during the late
1800s actively collected skulls and artifacts from battlefields and massacres oflndians for
shipment to museums (Fine-Dare 2002: 32; Harjo 2006). Additionally, the Indian Office
was engaged in activities to "civilize" the tribes, basically enacting assimilationist
regulations. These ran the gamut from education policies stifling traditional language
and culture to intermarriage with whites (Bieder 2000:31). The end of the "Indian Wars"
in the 1890s marked an upswing in public interest in Native American culture: the
World's Columbian Exposition of 1893 was complete with live displays ofNative
American miniature villages and families inhabiting them, showcasing "traditional" life.
Strickland's "Treaty Era" came to a close and the period of assimilation and allotment
began.
Federal legislation began to affect Native American and archaeology in more
direct ways with the turn of the century. The Federal Antiquities Act of 1906 decreased
looting and increased the federal government's ability to seize objects as archaeological
resources and demarcate places as national sites (Fine-Dare 2002; Moore 1987). The act
established a principle that cultural resources are important to the cultural history of the
United States and thus need to be protected (Watkins 2000:38); however, this continued
the focus on Native Americans as a dying race and on archaeological material.
Native Americans gained citizenship in 1924 with the Indian Citizenship Act. The third
of Strickland's periods saw Collier's Indian Reorganization Act of 1934, which prevented
states from impinging on tribes' treaty rights. By the 1950s, however, Congress led the
termination policy efforts to dismantle reservations and put an end to federal aid
programs; by 1968, termination was undermined (Fine-Dare 2002:65-68).

19
The 1960s saw a surge of Native American activism, paralleling the Civil Rights
Movement. The "Red Power" movement brought issues of discrimination against Native
Americans into national consciousness, and links between the historic preservation
movement and Native American were established in the following decade (Watkins
2000:7). The National Indian Youth Council staged protests such as the Alcatraz Island
occupation, the Longest Walk march protest contributed to the formation of the group
American Indians Against Desecration, and the Native American Rights Fund was
established in 1970 to provide legal assistance to Native Americans (Fine-Dare 2002).
This fifth era also saw the rise of prominent pan-Indian movements' concern for
protection of sacred places, burial grounds, and reburial of Native American remains. The
American Indian Religious Freedom Act of 1978 [AIRF A] was seminal, although
Watkins (2000) writes that the act had no "teeth", and the Archaeological Resources
Protection Act of 1979 [ARPA] also had provisions for requesting consultations from
tribes on whose land excavations were made. 1979 saw, for the first time, Native
American status equal to that of state and local government agencies relative to the
control of cultural resources (Watkins 2000:43). However, Moore (1987) still sees, in the
1979 act, "very little" meaningful change for Native people (3). Eleven years later,
NMAIA and than NAGPRA marked watershed moments in the growing movement for
reburial and repatriation on the federal level. Some states had already passed repatriation
legislation before 1990, but the national movement is significant for it recognizes a broad
concern over these issues.
Changes in Archaeology and Social Theory

20
As Native American law underwent significant changes over the past two
centuries, the disciplines of anthropology and archaeology have done so as well,
unsurprisingly given the fair amount of legislative changes concerning both the academy
and Native Americans. Early archaeology, writes Ferguson (1996:64) was mostly a
colonialist endeavor meant to aid in the domination of Native American populations by
Europeans: indigenous people were denigrated and accused of being incapable of
civilized life. The nascent discipline of American archaeology led to the formation of a
myth of the "epic potential of America"-the construction of a meta-narrative of
American democracy-based on the prehistory of Native Americans (Hinsley 2002:3841). The phrenological obsession of the 1800s gave way to Boasian anthropological
thought, a shift to the development of chronological techniques in archaeology and a
growing separation between ethnology and archaeology (Bieder 2002; Ferguson
1996:65). Processual archaeology, developed in the 1960s and 1970s, focused on the
changes within Native American societies and ecological variables and recognized Native
American cultures as just "as creative as European cultures," while still focusing on
universal terms that had little meaning for individual tribes (Ferguson 1996:65). Ferguson
also sees the development of Cultural Resource Management [CRM] from the 1970s
onward as a significant change within archaeology, although not within the academy:
CRM increases knowledge of Native American archaeology at development sites but also
commodities archaeology by "removing archaeology from the realm of universities into
the commercial area of contracts and private consulting companies" (66). Watkins (2000)
sees American archaeology today divided into two: "anthropological archaeology" (a
better term would be "academic archaeology") which is research-oriented in academia,

21
and "compliance archaeology" which is business and government based and focuses on
compliance with regulations (21). While CRM has continued from the 1970s onward,
processual archaeology ("academic archaeology") has been challenged by, appropriately
enough, post-processual archaeology (also "academic archaeology"). The post-processual
school accepts pluralism in archaeology and recognizes that archaeology is neither valueneutral nor possessing of a transcendental objectivity (Thomas 2000:242). Archaeology,
as the study of the past, "is a social and political practice intimately bound to the context
in which it is conducted" (Leone and Prence! 1992:115). This can be seen as a general
trend toward greater self-reflexivity in the field, and within the United States it is in part
due to criticism by Native Americans (Ferguson 1996:70). Critical theory, as applied to
archaeology by Leone and Prence! (I 992: 117), emphasizes that knowledge production
must be understood in its social context, as it is "rarely, if ever, apolitical." The debates
surrounding reburial and repatriation dramatically emphasize the political nature of
archaeology.
The trajectory of American archaeology as seen in its colonialist, processual,
CRM, and post-processual incarnations, is encompassed by a paradigmatic shift in social
theory. Boggs (2002) sees this shift occurring in the liberal polity-the "intellectual and
public life in the West" from "liberal" social theory to "culture" social theory. Liberal
theory is grounded in the Enlightenment project that embodies the principle of physical
science as social ideology and social form. It defines itself as grounded in "scientific"
understandings of human nature and economic law stemming from Hobbes and Locke
and the social contract based on individual reason and needs (Boggs 2002:60 I). Culture
theory, on the other hand, "grounds the diversity of human life worlds in natural human

22
sociality and symbolic faculties," using a Geertzian understanding of culture that
"decenters the Western experience as one among others" and rejects the claim of
universality ofliberal theory (601-602). This evolution began in late 20th-century
scientific thought, ironically enough (Boggs 2002:607). Other than offering a general
framework for changes within the discipline of archaeology, Boggs' thoughts are
important for the interactions between changing paradigms of social theory and the law
as it relates to Native Americans. Boggs' central thesis is that the incommesurability of
liberal theory and culture theory is demonstrated by the lag time of change in law and
economic policy (social practice) when compared to change in social theory, and that
"events in the arenas of U.S. Indian law and policy are ordered and illumined when
viewed as public arena clashes between liberal and cultural theory" (603). Laws such as
NAGPRA are "broadly informed" by cultural theory and serve the function of
introducing this perspective into administrative and legal decision-making, but are
nevertheless interpreted and defined by extant liberalist institutions (Boggs 2002:603).
McKeown notes this general backward-looking tendency in law as well, as the
interpretation of legislation like NAGPRA is guided by established cannons (2002: 109).
The incommesurability noted by Boggs is remarked upon, albeit in different language, at
the time ofNAGPRA's passage (Goldstein and Kintigh 1990; Leone and Preucel 1992;
Meighan 1992) and within the recent literature (Hubert and Fforde 2002; Thomas 2000;
Zimmerman 1996, 2002) that treats repatriation and its reception among various
stakeholders, such as Native Americans and museums or academic institutions. A caveat
must be mentioned, however, as the shift between the two competing paradigms
presented by Boggs is not straightforward or clear-cut: every group, whether treating the

23

law or archaeology or Natives, has heterogeneous elements that make classifications such
as "museums" or "Native Americans" too broad and over-general.
IfNAGPRA is a locus of contention in the process of a paradigm shift, then in the
social context of its formulation bears closer scrutiny.

24

Chapter 5
Getting to NAGPRA
How did NAGPRA come about? A variety of actors, both institutional and
individual, played a critical role in the development of federal repatriation law. In the
writings, interviews, and statements made by the various actors and stakeholders in the
process of negotiating federal repatriation law, the emphases are not always analogous,
which is understandable given the fact that personal experience shapes one's point of
view. Archaeologists speak most knowledgably about archaeologists, and etc. A more or
less chronological account follows, organized by general type of stakeholder, into five
major groups: tribal cases of reburial brought up under early federal or state laws, panNative American activity, individual professionals, professional organizations including
universities and museums, and finally Congress. These groups allow a convenient
organization of chronology, but there is considerable interaction and overlap of goals
among them. In general, individual cases by tribes drove the formation of state laws that
informed the pan-Native American activities. Native groups, along with several key
institutions and academics, took a pro-active stance while professional organizations and
museums acted primarily in reaction to demands for repatriation.
Early Rumblings

A broad goal of Native American leaders, articulated in the 1960s, was to earn
respect from the dominant segments of society. Manifesting in AIRF A, this goal also
ushered in the first explicitly articulated reburial and repatriation initiatives backed by the
force of law as protection for reservation land, sacred places, and burial places grew into

25
a demand for repatriation. Before the passage of the American Indian Religious Freedom
Act in 1978, there was a concerted effort by Native Americans for the protection of
sacred places and burial places involving state and federal governments. In 1967
Cheyenne leaders met at Bear Butte, a sacred site, and agreed to form a coalition of
Native American leaders to generally seek "respect in general society," including the
recovery of sacred objects from museums, protection for sacred places like Bear Butte,
and began meeting on a semi-regular basis across the country (Harjo 2006). One of the
multifarious goals of the coalition-which went by several names-was the
establishment of the explicit right of freedom of religion for Native Americans. The
coalition, with the help ofNARF, and eventually President Carter, was able to get
AIRF A signed into law in an edited form-"more of a policy statement with certain
requirements"-than as substantive law as it was originally envisioned by Native
American activists (Harjo 2006). Unfazed, the coalition continued its work on the
implementation of AIRF A, which was considered the same work as sacred places
protection and reburial. The passage of AIRF A represented an acknowledgment of the
history of discrimination against Native Americans practicing their religions as well as a
symbol of the extension of constitutional protections (Echo-Hawk and Echo-Hawk
1991 :63). AIRFA set the scene for more strident and successful reburial requests.

Tribal Requests and State Laws
The seeds of the legislation ofreburial and repatriation on a national level are
from individual tribes' reburial requests and state responses from the I 960s until the midl 980s. A specific focus on reburial occurred at the 1971 panel discussion at the Second
Convention oflndian Scholars in Aspen, at which issues such as the display of human

26
remains in cultural institutions were discussed and a call was made for a moratorium on
excavations of burials (Fine-Dare 2002:76). A few significant long-term efforts by Native
American tribes to regain cultural objects made repatriation particularly topical, such as
the repatriation of wampum to the Six Nations after 100 years of requests, finally
honored in 1970, and the repatriation of Ahayu:da war gods to the Zuni (Fine-Dare
2002:91-94; Watkins 2000:47). Ahayu:da were located around the country in various
museums and private collections, and many of the repatriation requests made in 1978
were honored in the 1980s, pre-NAGPRA (Ferguson, Anyan, and Ladd 2000:240). In the
mid-1980s, a Pawnee burial site called the Salina Pit was the focus of the Pawnee Tribe's
attempts to end public exhibition of human remains and rebury them (Echo-Hawk and
Echo-Hawk 1991; Brower and Putnam 1989). A one-year-long study of the illegitimate
acquisition of goods, undertaken during the Carter Administration also contributed to
bringing repatriation into the public's eye (Trope and Echo-Hawk 2002:128).
Several states began to pass laws as a result of tribes' insistence on reburial and
repatriation. Most notable are laws in California, Nebraska, and Iowa. In California, one
of the "most sweeping and severe" burial laws was enacted (Fine-Dare 2002:98), while
Kansas' Unmarked Burial Sites Preservation Act, applying to both public and private
lands, and Nebraska's Protection Act are noted for forming the basis of the ideas
enumerated in NAGRPA (Fine-Dare 2002:100-101, 117). Native American tribes also
began operating their own CRM and preservation archaeology projects (Ferguson
1996:69). The Pueblo of Zuni, for instance, is an exemplar of a tribal archaeological
program that worked to alleviate conflict between the tribe's interests and those of
outsiders (Watkins 2000:11).

27
Individual Archaeologists
Not only was the public apprised of the situation and state law changed, tribal
struggles for control over human remains also had impacts upon archaeologists
collaborating with or studying the tribes. T. J. Ferguson, an anthropologist working for
the Zuni Archaeology Program and Larry Zimmerman, an anthropologist at the
University of South Dakota, for example, were both significantly affected by their
cooperative work with the Zuni and the Crow Creek Sioux, respectively. Zimmerman in
particular was very vocal about his beliefs in the importance of repatriation during the
1980s, and his advocacy activities in the World Archaological Congress [WAC] and the
SAA (Zimmerman 1986, 1987, 1989, 1996, 1997, 2002). Occupying the opposite side of
the spectrum of archaeologists' opinions on repatriation is Clement Meighan, who, above
his outspoken criticism of repatriation in SAA publications (1992) and books (2002) also
helped form the American Committee for the Preservation of Archaeological Collections
[ACPAC], which protests the repatriation of unnamed individuals.
Pan-Indian Activism
Suzan Shown Harjo, a Native American activist and writer, sees the beginnings of
organized pan-Native American efforts to discuss and act upon reburial issues in the late
1960s. Harjo, one of the members of the unnamed sacred places/reburial/AIRFA
coalition from its inception, recalls that the term "repatriation" was not in general use
until the late l 970s when Native Americans, including herself, began seriously meeting
with government officials (2006). She traces the use of the term "repatriation" to the
repatriation of those killed in action on foreign soil, noting that the effort extended to
soldiers should provide an analogy to the desire of many Native American tribes to

28
rebury their own dead, some of whom were killed in violent interactions with American
soldiers (Molotsky 1989; Harjo 2006). An explicit goal of the coalition was to enact
federal-level repatriation law in order to regularize the patchy state laws and standardize
irregular enforcement.
Vine Deloria, Jr., a Native American academic and critic, brought the repatriation
issue into the mainstream with the publication of Custer Died for Your Sins: An Indian

Manifesto in 1969. Followed by other works exploring the relationship between
archaeology, the academy, and Native Americans, Custer Died for Your Sins was the
initial open challenge to anthropology, a "scathing attack" that challenged the "validity of
anthropological intent, method, and product" (Zimmerman 1997:92). The book was
published for a wide audience, not specialists, and the chapter deriding anthropologists
was even published slightly before the book, in Playboy (Deloria 1969a). Zimmerman
sees Deloria's work as part of a larger critique of social or cultural anthropology that led
to reexamination and a the publication of an ethics guide by the American
Anthropological Association [AAA] in 1976 which stated professional responsibilities
toward living subjects but which did not affect archaeology per se (1997:92). The rise of
more militant organizations, such as the American Indian Movement (responsible for the
takeovers of Alcatraz and Wounded Knee) and American Indians Against Desecration, as
well as the more moderate National Congress of the American Indian and the Native
American Rights Fund, all in the late 1960s and early 1970s, began to focus attention
upon reburial concerns (Riding In 2002:110; Zimmerman 1997:92). The NCAI, endorsed
by Deloria in 1969, and NARF, founded in 1970, are seen by James Riding In (2002) as
taking a more "conciliatory" stance in the 1980s and comprised mostly of law and

29
political professionals (111). NCAI and NARF, in particular, were jointly involved in
several activist projects, and there was a high degree of networking between the
organizations as well as between individuals such as Harjo and Walter Echo-Hawk and
key political players in the Smithsonian and in Congress.
Harjo, as a Washington insider having served with the Carter Administration, had
political ties to both congressmen and, as the executive director of the NCAI in the 1980s
and the original sacred places/reburial/AIRF A coalition, to Native American leaders
around the nation. She helped mobilized newspaper editorial campaigns and was
interviewed for a PBS special, and along with Walter Echo-Hawk, the legal aid ofNARF
and political consultants, prepared lawsuits on human rights premises against institutions,
primarily the Smithsonian, that were unresponsive to requests for repatriation (Harjo
2006, 2007). Changes in the administration of the Smithsonian and the threat of pending
lawsuits spurred, according to Harjo, meetings with the Secretary that in the end resulted
in the NMAIA and, with the backing of sympathetic Senators such as Daniel Inouye and
John McCain, NAGPRA.
Institutions and Professional Organizations
Early repatriation efforts were not confined to the activities of Native American
interest groups. The Society for Professional Archaeologists [SOPAJ, an offshoot of the
SAA (and now the Registry of Professional Archaeologists) embraced Native American
input into their codes of ethics, followed by the World Archaeological Congress [WAC].
Significantly, WAC held a meeting in Vermillion, South Dakota inl989 at the University
of South Dakota that included Native Americans as well as archaeologists. Organized by
Larry J. Zimmerman, the WAC outlined an ethical statements and policy guideline called

30
the Vermillion Accord (Zimmerman 1996, 1997). Seen by some as a more extreme
approach than that of SOPA, the WAC code of ethics also was the beginning of a shift of
power to what is called "covenantal archaeology" (Marshall 1989; Zimmerman 1996).
Covenantal archaeology involves a relationship of trust between archaeology and Native
Americans with a benefit accruing to those being studied (Zimmerman 2002:301). Six
defining principles of the Accord explicitly include the "need to respect the wishes of the
dead and the local community" and concurrently, the "need to respect the scientific
research value of human remains" (Marshall 1989:1186).
Zimmerman, influential at the WAC meeting, developed ties with Jan Hammil of
American Indians Against Desecration, a group that worked toward reburial and
repatriation (Zimmerman 1987). Zimmerman and Hammil took the WAC code of ethics
and a message of cooperation to the Society for American Archaeology meetings in 1982
following the Vermillion Accord, where they were met with well-disguised but deepseated ambivalence and antagonism (Zimmerman 1987, 1989). However, despite the
initially cold reception by archaeologists at the SAA meetings, Zimmerman sees the
covenantal archaeology embraced at WAC as a pivotal recognition within the discipline
that changes were underway. The Vermilion Accord was also a source that directly
informed Congress that negotiations were possible between Native Americans and
archaeologist, effectively putting "intense pressure" on the American scientific
community to come to terms with federal repatriation legislation (Zimmerman 2002:93).
Clement Meighan, a voice of opposition against widespread repatriation, founded
the ACPAC based on the fear that once repatriation was underway, there would be no

31
stopping point and all research collections would be decimated (Marshall 1989: 1186;
Meighan 1992, 2000).
The American Anthropological Association [AAA] was not immediately
embroiled in the repatriation debate, as the professional organization is not focused only
upon archaeology. However, a committee was created in 1970 that drafted a statement of
professional responsibility that was adopted by the AAA membership that year as the
Principles of Professional Responsibility (American Anthropological Association 1998;
Watkins 2000:25). The Principles embraced the idea that the primary responsibility of
any anthropologist is to his or her subjects: this means that a study, archaeological or
ethnographic, that causes harm to the subject must ethically be discontinued. In 1990 the
AAA voted revisions, but did not include a specific treatment of ethic for anthropology of
indigenous groups (Marshall 1989:1186; Watkins 2000:27). Nevertheless, the central
tenet laid out in 1970 of primary responsibility to the anthropologist's subject provided a
basis for some of the arguments for professional codes of ethics to include references to
Native Americans, or at least to the populations affected by archaeological study
(Zimmerman 1989).
The Society for American Archaeology, however, met early requests for
repatriation and reburial with recalcitrance. Between 1983 and 1985, Marshall believes
that the SAA had a distinctively anti-repatriation stance, which was moderated in 1985 to
encompass a case-by-case stance toward repatriation, with the acceptance of reburial
primarily for those remains that could be proved to be the predecessors of living lineal
descendants (1989: 1186). This position was widely touted in the media and by members
of the organization, with requests for all human remains considered, for the most part,

33
The Smithsonian, with a repository of about 18,500 Native American remains,
was a highly symbolic institution in the repatriation issue. Unresponsive to demands for
repatriation and even requests for meetings, the Smithsonian presented a bulwark of antirepatriation sentiment. Curators such as Douglas Ubelaker, Doug Owsley, and Donald
Ortner were particularly vocal in newspaper and magazine coverage of the issue, framed
as an intense debate by the media (Barringer 1989; Browne 1986, 1990; New York Times
1989; Robbins 1988). For years, argues Marshall (1989), the Smithsonian was "the most
visible holdout against the movement" (1184). By 1989, however, the Smithsonian
underwent a "reversal" in their policy and began repatriations (Deloria 1989:2).

Congress and Federal Legislation
Over 26 different bills were introduced on Capitol Hill in a four-year period that
attempted to forge a compromise with Native Americans demanding the right to rebury
human remains, the federal government, and professional and academic interests in the
study of Native American remains currently in the possession of museums across the
country.
Senator John Melcher introduced S. 2952 to create a forum for the resolution of
disputes over human remains and Native American artifacts in the possession of
museums and universities, marking a shift in federal legislative intent (Sockbeson, 1990,
p. 3). S. 2952 was dismissed early in the process due to lack of support. But the Melcher
Bill was followed by the introduction of legislation from Representative Udall and
Senators Inouye and McCain over the next four years, which garnered bipartisan support

in both houses. Senator Inouye, in particular, was noted in the press for his sponsorship of
"Bones Bills" (Spotted Elk 1989). Suzan Shown Harjo (2006) remembers meeting with

34
Sen. Inouye in his office in Washington D.C. overlooking the Mall, while the Senator
pointed out the gap between Smithsonian buildings in which he wanted to build a
museum of the American Indian.
Out of the twenty-six proposed bills, two laws were created: the NMAIA in 1989
and NAGPRA in 1990. By 1990, the language of the bill had been hammered out in the
Senate Select Committee on Indian Affairs and in the House Committee on House and
Insular Affairs. Testimonies were presented by Paul Bender of the National Dialogue on
Museum/Native American Relations; Thomas Livesay, Edward Able, and Raymond
Thompson of the AAM; Keith Kintigh of the SAA; Lynne Goldstein as an interested
individual; Walter Echo-Hawk and Henry Sockbeson from NARF; Edward Lone Fight
from the Fort Berthold Tribal Council I North Dakota; Norbert S. Hill, Jr. from the
American Indian Science and Engineering Society; Jerry Flute and Jack F. Trope from
the Association on American Indian Affairs; and Martin E. Sullivan of the Heard
Museum.
All in all, Congress was not "acting unilaterally ... passage of the bill was
supported by national organizations representing museums, archaeologists, physical
anthropologists, cultural anthropologists, preservationists, Indian tribes, civil libertarians
and eighteen religious denominations" (McKeown 2002: 108). Letters cosigned by the
AAIA, NCAI, NARF, and SAA were sent to Representative Morris Udall, Chair of the
House Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs, and President Bush endorsing the final
draft (Society for American Archaeology 1990). The AAM sent a separate letter to the
same effect (Ibid.). The only major dissenting voice heard by 1990 was the Department
of the Interior (Deloria 1989:2; McKeown 2002:108).

35
In the end, when H.R. 5237 came up for a vote in the House, it passed
unanimously; in the Senate, a voice count was taken, indicating that the vote was not a
close one, and it carried in favor of the bill (KcKeown 2002:108). President Bush singed
the bill into law November 16, 1990.
Working Together
These five main groups of actors, individual tribal/state repatriation, individual
archaeologists and museum professionals, pan-Native American organizations,
professional organizations, and the U.S. Congress, all informed the actions of the other
groups. Individuals crossed group boundaries, and individuals within the groups were
catalysts for group- or organizational-wide changes. Individual instances of tribes
working with specific archaeological activity and repatriation efforts, such as Zuni or the
Crow Creek site, became example cases either for Native Americans as repatriation
victories or for archaeologists as examples of beneficial cooperation. They also raised the
issue ofrepatriation and burial site protection in individual states and were the impetus
for state laws on repatriation. The state laws and negative examples from museums and
historical societies informed the participants in pan-Native American activity that focused
on repatriation and burial site protection on a federal level. Congress came to be involved
through the influence of particular representatives and senators. Professional
archaeological and anthropological organizations, while largely conservative and slow to
change, eventually moderated their policy and ethics statements once federal repatriation
was seriously considered in Congress; some, however, embrace repatriation, while others
decried it. Public sentiment was reported to fall on what was categorized as the Native
American "side", which had concomitant effects of raising support in Congress.

36
While deeper-seated changes were afoot, such as who has legitimacy to create
knowledge about the past, and perhaps as well human rights and an end to differential
treatment, pre-NAGPRA repatriation discourse deeply involved the comparatively small
number of professional archaeologists and anthropologists, museums, and spokespeople
for Native American tribes and individuals. This is demonstrated in the
interconnectedness of the efforts for and against repatriation.

37

Chapter 6
Motivation and Discourse
While much has been written about NAGPRA and its influences in retrospect, the
debates over repatriation between the groups of actors enumerated above prior to
NAGPRA and immediately after it became law are important as a means of tracking the
process of negotiation and to a certain extent the changes made within the discourse of
the archaeological discipline and museum practices. Publications and statements made by
individuals in newsprint, magazines, books, peer-reviewed journals, and before Congress
illuminate a gradual process of acceptance of repatriation that is nevertheless still
controversial, especially in terms of implementation. Opinions and debates are framed
within several major categories of argument, discussed below. Major sources for this
discussion include twenty years of New York Times articles, editorials, and letters-to-theeditor, from 1980 to 1999; SAA materials recently made public on the SAA web
(www.saa.org) concerning the organization's lobbying efforts, ethical statements, and
letters of endorsement, dating back to 1983; a general review of scholarly literature; and
both unpublished and published Congressional Committee hearings and testimonial
statements.
Neither proponents of repatriation nor opponents of repatriation were
homogeneous, nor were they as polarized or incommensurate as media made them
appear. However, there are certain trends that are apparent and rhetorical strategies are
generally split between "progressive" and "conservative" views.

Personal and Impersonal

38
One rhetorical trend is the emphasis on personal experience, which contrasts with
a trend toward a more universalistic position that removes the individual from the picture.
These rhetorical strategies map onto Boggs' framework of a paradigmatic shift from
liberal theory to culture theory.
Many of the arguments from Native Americans, Native American groups, and
academics seen by others as linked to Native American causes use a strategy in the
arguments for repatriation and for federal legislation that relies on an introduction of
personal background. This background informs their position on repatriation, usually
motivating them to seek wider acceptance of repatriation.
For example, Suzan Shown Harjo, who was executive director of the NCAI
during the 1980s and who was highly involved with repatriation legislation efforts with
Walter Echo-Hawk and Senator Daniel Inouye, as well as being a Heye Foundation
trustee, frequently frames her involvement with repatriation in terms of her personal
background. In an interview May 2006, she spoke extensively of the influence certain
museums had upon her in visits to collections which informed her decision to become
involved with repatriation efforts and the sacred places/repatriation/AIRFA coalition. A
trip to the Museum of the American Indian in New York in 1965 which she describes as
"a terrible place" at the time, "filled with things that should not have been there,"
including burial garments that her mother believe she had made for her own grandfather
(Harjo 2006). She also had relatives killed at the Sand Creek Massacre in 1864, from
whom crania were amassed by the Army Medical Corps and eventually stored at the
Smithsonian, a fact that she discovered on the eve of negotiations with the Secretary of
the Smithsonian over the language ofNMAIA and which influenced her to take a harder

39
line in negotiations (Harjo 2006). She also mentions in her 2006 interview that educating
Smithsonian officials about the personal feelings she held helped her negotiations.
Robert McCormick Adams, the new Secretary of the Smithsonian in the midl 90s, collaborated with Harjo and other museum leaders such as Thomas Livesay of the
Heard Museum over the language ofNMAIA, which was expanded upon in NAGPRA.
Harjo recalls that Adams, for most of the negotiations, balked at the NCAI preferred
language of repatriation that covered tribal affiliation, not just the remains of lineal
descendants. However, when she brought it to Adams' attention that her relatives killed
in the Sand Creek Massacre were curated at the Smithsonian, Adams was more amenable
to more inclusive changes in the language of the bill (Harjo 2006).
Larry Zimmerman presents another example of a professional archaeologist who
was influenced by personal experience. His involvement with the Crow Creek Massacre
site of Sioux in the early 1980s led him to form ties with the AIAD and a pro-federalrepatriation stance. He directly credits his involvement with WAC and the SAA to his
positive experiences cooperating with Native Americans on excavations (Zimmerman
1986, 1987, 1989).
Language to a similar effect is also apparent in many arguments for repatriation in
the news that utilize ancestors or family. Walter Echo-Hawk, for example, is quoted in an
interview by People Magazine about the Pawnee remains in the Salina Burial Pit
referring to a need to rebury the remains, his "ancestors" (Brower and Putnam 1989:43).
This article also interviews Tom Witty, an archaeologist employed by Kansas State, who,
with cooperation with Echo-Hawk, had a "change of heart" after his initial "appalled"
reaction to requests to rebury archaeological evidence (Brower and Putnam 1989:44).

40
Suzan Shown Harjo also uses a similar rhetorical strategy in interviews with news
reporters: she questions what readers would do if their own grandfathers were on display
(Lewis 1986) as well as remarks that her own forefathers were killed in a massacre and
their skulls collected (Molotsky 1989). Before the passage of the NMAIA, the NCAI and
the Native American coalition on sacred places/repatriation also waged a media
campaign in which hundreds of editorial letters were sent to hometown newspapers of
Congressmen urging federal repatriation legislation. Over 500 papers carried the
editorials, and PBS also aired a programs that was shown around the country (Harjo
2007).
Additionally, in an article seven years after the passage ofNAGPRA, the same
style of argumentation is used by Melissa Fawcett of the Mohegan Tribe: she remembers
that as a girl she knew of grave robbing and the theft of sacred objects, including that of
her direct ancestors, and "wondered how we could get them back" (Weizel 1998). These
arguments are based on arousing a sense of moral outrage, as those who hear of the
desecration of family members' graves are implicitly, and in some cases explicitly (Lewis
1986; Spotted Elk 1989), asked to imagine themselves in the same position. As Harjo
remarks, "Everyone could understand that something was wrong" when they heard the
number of specimens in the Smithsonian's collection and that the Smithsonian was
reluctant to return any of them (Harjo 2007). The moral outrage that Clara Spotted Elk,
staff member for Representative Melcher, attributes to Melcher when he learned of the
number of Native American remains housed in the Smithsonian speaks to the power the
argument can have (Preston 1989:68).

41

The general public, Congressmen, and members of the professional archaeology
and museum communities were the targets of arguments made for repatriation that
included personal anecdotes about relatives. Similarly, professionals influenced by their
own participation with Native Americans seeking repatriation also formed arguments for
repatriation for their profession using their personal experiences.
A contrasting rhetorical strategy is that of distinctly impersonal argumentation.
Many of the opponents of federal repatriation legislation used language that emphasized
more abstract ideas such as "knowledge", "science", and "professional responsibility"
that are not grounded in emotional individual accounts. As can be imagined, this type of
language is more often found in statements of museums and professional or academic
organizations. Some have commented that the values expressed in these arguments were
not as persuasive to the general public due to a general distaste for academia as elitist
(Preston 1989:70).
During the 1980s, as repatriation legislation loomed in Congress, the coverage of
the topic in the media included this global-oriented language through interviews with key
academics and museum professionals. For instance, an editorial by Force (1985) of the
Heye Foundation in New York City (which later sent much of its Native American
collections to the NMAI) remarks on the purpose of museums to hold their collections "in
trust" for the public good. Ortner and Ubelaker, both of the Smithsonian, are quoted in
the news as opposing repatriation due to responsibilities to study and care for collections
in the "interest of the Indians as well as the scientists" (Browne 1986) for it is a
"safeguarding a collection that belongs to all peoples" (Lewis 1986). Douglas Ubelaker
took a solid anti-repatriation stance for unnamed remains, commenting that with

42
repatriation, "they're going to destroy them, along with their scientific value" (Robbins
1988). A 1990 article, just prior to the creation ofNAGRPA as law, reported that "many
Indian leaders" wanted remains and artifacts back "regardless of the loss to science"
(Browne 1990). Ubelaker is quoted in the same article, saying that science with
"inevitably" be the "loser" (Ibid). Similarly, Clement Meighan, a professor of
anthropology at UCLA, remarked after NAGPRA in 1990 that repatriation will destroy
all the significant collections and he says, consequently, "you've just wiped out the total
history of the Indians in North America" (Mydans 1990). These interviews express the
idea that science as a way of knowing, as well as the history that science reveals, is of
paramount importance.
In 1990 committee hearings in the Senate and the House of Representatives over
the bills that became NAGPRA, there is a tendency for the emphasis on ideals grounded
in the impersonal. The AAM statement before the Senate Select Committee called for the
recognition of the nature of scientific study and emphasized that "all research is
important and all research is beneficial" (Able N. d.). Native American interests are cast
as narrow interests in comparison to the "broader" scientific and public interest (Kintigh
N. d.). The Director of the Heard Museum, although generally pro-repatriation, evokes
the general thrust of most of these global arguments, at least from the museum
community perspective: museums are fiduciary institutions "incorporated to act in trust
for the public benefit" (Sullivan N. d.). It is the nature of the public benefit that is
contested in the hearings. Lynne Goldstein, in her testimony before the House Committee
on Interior and Insular Affairs, remarks, "the heritage of this country is too important and
too fragile to leave to proposals that may not be carefully considered by all parties"

43
(Goldstein N. d.). As above, ideals of heritage, science, and knowledge are prominently
emphasized alongside the endorsements of case-by-case repatriation (not federal
legislation) and the limiting ofrepatriation to named remains and stolen objects.
Post-NAGPRA, peer-reviewed articles also evinced similar global arguments.
Meighan, for example, insists in The Public Historian that "the public interest in
sacrificed to special interest groups" because of the loss and destruction ofremains and
objects allowed through NAGPRA (1992:40). As Klesert and Powell (1993) note, a
culturally embedded concept informs this discourse, for it is based upon an "appeal to
science as necessary for the discovery of 'truth'" and that science outweighs cultural
costs or objections (349). Personal appeals to morality or decency find their counterpoint
in global, impersonal arguments for the general public trust and the advancement of
science, from the New York Times to Congress to the pages of scholarly journals.
Rights and Constitutionality

Rights and freedoms are also the focus of much of the discourse surrounding
federal repatriation legislation. Religious freedom, academic freedom, human rights, and
the rights of scientists were four major categories used to frame opinions and moral
judgments about repatriation.
"Religious freedom" was a rallying point for much of the pre-NAGPRA
"progressive" discourse. After AIRF A legislated freedom ofreligious specifically for
Native Americans, religious freedom was used as a negative example: arguments for
repatriation were couched in language that endorsed repatriation as the rectification of
violations of the freedom ofreligion. However, the argument was easily construed in the
press as a confrontation between religion and science, a topic that has continually

44
fascinated reporters, the public, and legislators in a variety of settings, from headscarves
in schools to intelligent design. Freedom of religion was neither frequently mentioned in
Congressional testimonies nor in academic journals when pro-repatriation stances were
expressed, and it is not explicitly part of ethics statements, although museums and
professional organizations do make broad use of the term "respect", which can include
respect of religious beliefs.
Similarly, "academic freedom" is not often used to critique repatriation in more
recent publications on the topic, although the bogeyman of book-burning was frequently
raised in newspapers pre-NAGPRA. The phrase was not mentioned in congressional
hearings in 1990, and has not been a recent subject in peer-reviewed literature, except as
an example of miscast suspicions before NAGPRA was implemented. For example,
Joyce writes that accusations that repatriation curtailed academic freedom are misplaced,
as academic freedom means freedom to think and express ideas, not to act (i.e. curate
human remains or perform research upon them) (2002:99). It seems that this vein of
discourse proved, for the most part, ineffectual, and so has been dropped from the
majority of publication on the topic.
Human rights were almost universally mentioned by Native Americans and prorepatriation individuals and groups. While arguments about personal ties to remains or
objects curated by museums and the Smithsonian were generally absent from the
testimonies presented before Congress, human rights were specifically mentioned.
Human rights were also brought up a significant portion of the time in the context of
personal narratives as well in news sources and interviews, although the language was
less formal and the term "human rights" was not always used. However, the general sense

45

in many of these accounts, specifically in newspapers, is that fundamental decencies
universal to all people were denied to Native Americans. The idea of inequality before
the law and the rectification of discrimination are two ideas linked to human rights that
were also frequently used. In academic debates over NAGPRA in scholarly journals, and
between members of the professional societies in journals, the idea of the violation of
human rights is used to oppose more conservative stances for narrower, less inclusive
repatriation policies. Arguments for broad, inclusive repatration legislation were wellgrounded in legal precedent provided by human rights law, which was presented in
Congress (Echo-Hawk, N. d.; Sockebeson N. d.). Much of the retrospective literature
treating NAGPRA, published a decade or more after the law passed, cites NAGPRA as a
mostly successful rectification of human rights violations. The changes in museum
policies and professional organization ethical statements have come to incorporate human
rights language, generally implicit, in an example of Zimmerman's observation of
syncretism over NAGPRA. As NAGPRA seems to have successfully been cast in public
opinion as human rights law, then the maintenance of an anti-NAGPRA stance connotes
anti-human rights as well.
Arguments for the right of scientists-and archaeologists as well-to examine
human remains and the rights or responsibilities of museums to curate human remains
and culturally significant objects were frequently made in the 1980s and early 1990s, but
taper off as NAGPRA is successfully implemented and repatriations are made to tribes.
While there are still strong elements of insistence upon the importance of research,
especially concerning Kennewick Man, post-NAGPRA reporting emphasizes a sense of
loss combined with avowals of the importance ofrespect to the subjects studied/curated

46
and the idea that the fields of archaeology and museum studies are in fact benefited by
more responsible relationships with Native American tribes. It would be foolish to
consider the amended opinions, post-NAGPRA, as merely sour grapes; rather, the fear of
complete loss of collections and research subjects was proven to be mostly unfounded
and a gradual "sea-change" occurred in the opinion toward repatriation (Sabloff 2007).
Joyce, an anthropologist herself, sees this as a change from an emphasis on rights to an
emphasis on responsibility (2002: I 02). Many museums include in their charters language
to the effect that they are public trusts. While this fiduciary responsibility was held at first
to be in opposition to repatriation (or at least, those running museums cast it as such),
public trust has been re-interpreted to encompass the Native American population (Weisz
and Adams 2000). Additionally, some museums have seen benefits from the higher
degree of involvement with Native Americans as the institutions work toward becoming
"living institutions", as past director of the Heard Museum, Martin Sullivan, puts it
(Blumenthal 1999; Sabloff2007).
Zimmerman describes changing attitudes towards repatriation as a "classic
syncretism" in which archaeologists and Native Americans are brought into partnerships
with archaeologists (I 997). In an examination of several strains of the discourse
surrounding the inception ofNAGPRA, it seems that the personalization of repatriation
and the idea of repatriation as human rights legislation are the two most significant
factors in this process, not only among professional archaeologists but in the eyes of
lawmakers and the public as well. Boggs, in his treatment of what he views as a
"paradigm shift", relegates NA GPRA to an endnote example, but the changes in attitude

47

and in law reflect his statement that there is a shift underway "not away from but within
science" (2002:600).

48

Chapter7
Conclusion
Some have argued that archaeology as an academic discipline can be seen as a
"culture." If so, I would posit that in the last three decades, archaeology-as-culture has
dramatically exemplified the cultural anthropological definition of culture as a contested
process of meaning making. NAGPRA, most spectacularly in its provisions for the
repatriation of unknown individuals to "culturally affiliated" tribes and the repatriation of
unassociated, sacred, and cultural patrimony objects, as the federal law NAGPRA
represents a frozen moment in the process of making meaning.
Discourse surrounding the conception and the drafting of the law, from a variety
of sources, shows a general change. An acceptance of the argument that NAGPRA and
repatriation are human rights efforts comes to dominate post-NAGPRA, while discourse
about religious freedom, academic freedom, and the rights of scientists are downplayed.
Important to this change are personal examples demonstrating what can be described as
human rights violations, or at least violations of basic decency.
However, while the process by which the law was conceived and drafted may be
considered a compromise or negotiation between interested stakeholders, the Act is
exactly that: a legal document. In defining such terms as "Native American", "human
remains", "sacred objects", and the actors involved, federally recognized tribes and
federally funded institutions, NAGPRA defines boundaries upon the material world that
are subject to the interpretation of the American legal system and its courts based on past
precedent. There is no compromise or negotiation of the law, only the creation of the law.

49

Nevertheless, amendment processes since NAGPRA's passage offer new opportunities to
redefine or renegotiate these boundaries.

50
References

Able, Edward H.
N. d. Submission to Daniel K. Inouye on behalf of American Association of
Museums, Addition to Testimony delivered May 14, 1990. June 4, 1990.
Unpublished MS. American Association of Museums.
American Anthropological Association
1998 Code of Ethics of the American Anthropological Association. Electronic
Document. Retrieved May I, 2007 from
http://www.aaanet.org/committees/ethics/ethcode.htm.
Barringer, Felicity
1989 Major Accord Likely on Indian Remains. New York Times August 20,
I 989: 22.
Bieder, Robert E.
2000 The Representations oflndian Bodies in Nineteenth-Century American
Anthropology. In Repatriation Reader: Who Own Native American Remains?.
Devon A. Mihesuah, ed. Pp. 19-36. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska
Press.
Blumenthal, Ralph
1999 Making Peace With Museums To Celebrate Their Culture. New York
Times May 13, 1999: El.
Boggs, James P.
2002 Anthropological Knowledge and Native American Cultural Practice in the
Liberal Polity. American Anthropologist 104(2):599-610.
Brower, Montgomery and Putnam, Conan
1989 Walter Echo-Hawk Fights For His People's Right to Rest in Peace-Not in
Museums. People Magazine 32(10):42-44.
Browne, Malcolm W.
1986 Smithsonian Bones Reveal Tales of Suffering Long Ago. New York Times
March 18, 1986: Cl.
Callahan, Joan C.
1987 On Harming the Dead. Ethics 97(2):341-352.
Columbia Law Review.
1905 Nature of rights in a dead body. Columbia Law Review 5:543-544.
Delaney, D.
200 I Making nature/marking humans: Law as a site of (cultural) production.
Annals of the Association of American Geographers 91 :487-503.
Deloria, Vine Jr.
1969a Anthropologists and Other Friends. From Custer Died for Your Sins: An
Indian Manifesto. Playboy Magazine 16(8):131-132, 172-175.
1969b Custer Died for Your Sins: An Indian Manifesto. New York: Avon Books.
1989 A Simple Question of Humanity: The Moral Dimensions of the Reburial
Issue. NARF Legal Review 14(4):1-12.
Echo-Hawk, Walter, and Echo-Hawk, Roger
1991 Repatriation, Reburial, and Religious Rights. In Handbook of American
Indian Religious Freedom. Christopher Vecsey, ed. Pp. 63-80.

51
Ferguson, T. J.
1996 Native Americans and the Practice of Archaeology. Annual Review of
Anthropology 25:63-79.
Ferguson, T. J., Anyon, Roger, and Ladd, Edmund J.
2000 Repatriation at the Pueblo of Zuni: Diverse Solutions to Complex
Problems. In Repatriation Reader: Who Own Native American Remains?.
Devon A. Mihesuah, ed. Pp. 239-265. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska
Press.
Fine-Dare, Katherine
2002 Grave Injustice: The American Indian Repatriation Movement and
NAGPRA. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.
Force, Roland W.
1985 [Letter to the Editor]. New York Times April 6, 1985: 18.
Goldstein, Lynne
N.d. Statement for Committee on Interior & Insular Affairs U. S. House of
Representatives: Hearing on H. R. 164 & H. R. 1381. July 17, 1990.
Unpublished MS.
Goldstein, Lynne, and Kintigh, Keith.
1990 Ethics and the reburial controversy. American Antiquity 55:585-591
Harvard Law Review
1896 Nature of the rights in a dead body. Harvard Law Review 10:51-52.
1940 Criminal law, dead bodies, 'indecent' cremation held a common law
misdemeanor. Harvard Law Review 53:1047-1048.
Hinsley, Curtis M. Jr.
2000 Digging for Identity: Reflections on the Cultural Background for
Collecting. In Repatriation Reader: Who Own Native American Remains?.
Devon A. Mihesuah, ed. Pp. 37-55. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska
Press.
Hubert, Jane, and Fforde, Cressida
2002 Introduction: the reburial issue in the twenty-first century. In The Dead and
Their Possessions: Repatriation in principle, policy, and practice. Cressida
Fforde, Jane Hubert, and Paul Turnbull, eds. Pp. 1-16. One World
Archaeology Series. London: Routledge.
J. F.H.
1926 The nature of rights in a dead body. University of Pennsylvania Law
Review and American Law Register 74:404-407.
Joyce, Rosemary A.
2002 Academic freedom, stewardship, and cultural heritage: weighing the
interests of stakeholders in crafting repatriation approaches. In The Dead and
Their Possessions: Repatriation in principle, policy, and practice. Cressida
Fforde, Jane Hubert, and Paul Turnbull, eds. Pp. 99-107. One World
Archaeology Series. London: Routledge.
Kintigh, Keith W.
N.d. Society for American Archaeology Attachment to the Statement on H.R.
5237 Native American Grave Protection and Repatriation Act: For the House

52
Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs July 17, 1990. Unpublished MS.
Society for American Archaeology.
Klesert, Anthony L., and Powell, Shirley
1993 A Perspective on Ethics and the Reburial Controversy. American Antiquity
58(2):348-354.
Leone, Mark P., and Preucel, Robert W.
1992 Archaeology in a Democratic Society: A Critical Theory Perspective. In
Quandaries and Quests: Visions of Archaeology's Future. LuAnn
Wandsnider, ed. Center for Archaeologist Investigation, Occasional Paper No.
20. Board of Trustees, Southern Illinois University.
Lewis, Peter H.
1986 Indian Bones: Balancing Research Goals and Tribes' Rights. New York
Times May 20, 1986: C3.
Marshall, Eliot
1989 Smithsonian, Indian Leaders Call a Truce. Science, New Series 245: 11841186.
McKeown, C. Timothy
2002 Implementing a 'true compromise': the Native American Graves Protection
and Repatriation Act after ten years. In The Dead and Their Possessions:
Repatriation in principle, policy, and practice. Cressida Fforde, Jane Hubert,
and Paul Turnbull, eds. Pp. I 08-132. One World Archaeology Series. London:
Routledge.
Meighan, Clement W.
1992 Another View on Repatriation: Lost to the Public, Lost to History. The
Public Historian 14(3):39-45.
2000 Some Scholars' Views on Reburial. In Repatriation Reader: Who Own
Native American Remains?. Devon A. Mihesuah, ed. Pp. 190-199. Lincoln,
NE: University of Nebraska Press.
Meyers, D. W.
1990 The human body and the law. 2nd ed. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.
Molotsky, Irvin
1989 Smithsonian to Give Up Indian Remains. New York Times, September 13:
Al4.
Moore, S.
1987 "Federal Indian burial policy-Historical anachronism or contemporary
reality?" NARF Legal Review 12(2):1-7.
Mydans, Seth
1990 Study oflndians' Remains: Science or Sacrilege?. New York Times
October 19, 1990: Al 8.
Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act: as Amended
1990 Public Law 101-106, 101 st Congress.US. Statutes at Large 104.
New York Times
1989 A Sensible Compromise on Indian Bones. New York Times August 26,
1989: 22.
Preston, Douglas

53
1989 Skeletons in Our Museums' Closets: Native Americans Want Their
Ancestors' Bones Back. Harper's 278(1665):66-75.
Riding In, James
2000 Repatriation: A Pawnee's Perspective. In Repatriation Reader: Who Own
Native American Remains?. Devon A. Mihesuah, ed. Pp. 106-120. Lincoln,
NE: University of Nebraska Press.
Robbins, Jim
1988 A Fight for Framents oflndian Culture. New York Times October 23,
1988: Al.
Sabloff, Jeremy
2007 [Interview with the author]. January I, 2007.
Sappol, M.
2002 A traffic of dead bodies: Anatomy and embodied social identity in
nineteenth-century America. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Shown Harjo, Suzan
2006 [Interview]. May 22-23, 2006. University of Pennsylvania.
2007 [Personal Communication with the author]. April 22, 2007.
Sockbeson, Henry J.
1990 Repatriation act protects Native burial remains and artifacts. NARF Legal
Review 16(1):1-4.
Society for American Archaeology
2006 [1990] Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (H.R.
5237): Letters of Support. Electronic Document. Retrieved November I, 2006
from http://rla.unc/edu/saa/rpat/.
Spotted Elk, Clara
1989 Skeletons in the Attic. New York Times March 8, 1989: A3 l.
Strickland, Rennard
1998 The Eagle's Empire: Sovereignty, Survival, and Self-Governance in Native
American Law and Constitution. In Studying Native America: Problems and
Prospects. Russell Thornton, ed. Pp. 247-270. Madison, WI: University of
Wisconsin Press.
Sullivan, Martin E.
N. d. Statement Before the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs, U. S.
House of Representatives, July 17, 1990. July 17, 1990. Unpublished MS.
Heard Museum.
Swain, M. S. & Marusyk, R. W.
1990 An alternative to property rights in human tissues. The Hastings Center
Report 20(5): 12-15.
Thomas, David Hurst
2000 Skull Wars: Kennewick Man, Archaeology, and the Battle for Native
American Identity. New York: Basic Books.
Thornton, Russell
1998 Who Owns Our Past?: The Repatriation ofNative American Human
Remains and Cultural Objects. In Studying Native America: Problems and
Prospects. Pp. 385-415. Russell Thornton, ed. Madison, WI: University of
Wisconsin Press.

54

Trope, Jack F., and Echo-Hawk, Walter
2000 Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act: Background and
Legislative History. In Repatriation Reader: Who Own Native American
Remains?. Devon A. Mihesuah, ed. Pp. 123-168. Lincoln, NE: University of
Nebraska Press.
Van de Kamp, J. K.,
N.d. [Personal Communication, May 21, 1990]. In Appendix B. In Sockbeson, H.
Testimony of Henry J. Sockbeson, Native American Rights Fund before the
House Interior and Insular Affairs Committee July 17, 1990.
Watkins, Joe
2000 Indigenous Archaeology: American Indian Values and Scientific Practice.
Walnut Creek, CA: Altamira Press.
Weaver, Jace
1997 Indian Presence with No Indians Present: NAGPRA and its Discontents.
Wicazo Sa Review. 12(2): 3-30.
Weisz, Jackie, and Adams, Roxana, eds.
2000 Codes of Ethics and Practice oflnterest to Museums. Washington, D.C.:
American Association of Museums, Technical Information Services.
W eizel, Richard
1998 Mohegans Seek Objects' Return. New York Times February 8, 1998: CTI.
Zimmerman, Larry J.
1986 Review: "Tell them about the suicide" A Review of Recent Materials on the
Reburial of Prehistoric Native American Skeletons. American Indian
Quarterly 10(4):333-343.
1987 Webb on reburial: a North American perspective. Antiquity 61: 462-463.
1989 Made radical by my own: an archaeologist learns to accept reburial. In
Conflicting Archaeology of Living Traditions. R. Layton, ed. Pp. 60-67.
London: Unwin Hyman.
1996 Epilogue: A New and Different Archaeology? American Indian Quarterly.
Special Issue: Repatriation: An Interdisciplinary Dialogue 20(2):297-307.
2000 A New and Different Archaeology? With a Postscript on the Impact of the
Kennewick Debate. In Repatriation Reader: Who Own Native American
Remains?. Devon A. Mihesuah, ed. Pp. 294-306. Lincoln, NE: University of
Nebraska Press.
2002 A decade after the Vermillion Accord: what has changed and what has not?
In The Dead and Their Possessions: Repatriation in principle, policy, and
practice. Cressida Fforde, Jane Hubert, and Paul Turnbull, eds. Pp. 91-98. One
World Archaeology Series. London: Routledge.

