Anthropology Senior Theses

University of Pennsylvania

ScholarlyCommons
Department of Anthropology

Spring 2007

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
Nerlie Pierre
University of Pennsylvania

Follow this and additional works at: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses

Q

Part of the Anthropology Commons

Recommended Citation
Pierre, Nerlie, "The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87" (2007). Anthropology Senior Theses. Paper 82.

This paper is posted at ScholarlyCommons. https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/82
For more information, please contact repository@pobox.upenn.edu.

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
Disciplines
Anthropology

This thesis or dissertation is available at ScholarlyCommons: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/82

The Culture of Haitian
Medicine:

N erlie Pierre
Anthropology 300/301
·· ... Senior Honors Thesis
Dr. Fran Barg
Spring 2007

Photos by Tibo (Haiti).

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87

Abstract
Culture is defines as "the integrated pattern of belie±; and behavior that depends
upon the capacity for learning and transmitting lmowledge to succeeding generations."
Medicine is described to be "a substance or preparation used in treating disease."

34

34

Hence, the culture of medicine is understood to be specific beliefs, practices, language,
and methods of treating disease that can be transmitted from one generation to the next.
The culture of medicine varies greatly among continents, countries, states, cities, towns,
neighborhoods, homes, and individuals. Route 87, a small town in Haiti exhibits perfectly
this phenomenon. Surrounded by progressing cities, this impoverished sector of Haiti
remains distinct in its lifestyle, beliefs, and medical culture. Through contact with the
founders of a United States outreach organization, based in Haiti, called Fondation de
Secours Internationale Haiti, 1 have used the techniques of medical anthropology to learn

about the town. From what is known, Route 87 is an impoverished sector of an already
impoverished country that endures many of its repercussions-unsanitary conditions,
poor quality foods, poor hygiene, exposure to undetected disease, etc. However, the
members of this sector experience less disease outbreaks than the remainder of the
country. Throughout this paper, I will discuss the history of traditional and Haitian
medicine. I will also discuss the illness that plague Haiti, the influence of the HIV/AIDS
epidemic during the 1991 coup d'etat and how Route 87 locals don't seem to experience
these outbreaks. Lastly, I will expose Route 87 culture, practices, and what is currently
known about the medical system by drawing upon the social, biological and linguistic
factors that will help me understand and to explain the reason for this disparity in disease
and health.

1

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87

Table of Contents
Introduction

3

The History of the Republic of Haiti

3

History of Haitian Medicine

4

Biomedicine in Haiti

5

Folk Medicine in Haiti

7

Disease in Haiti
Lymphatic Filariasis

9
9

17
21
25
Disc

27

26
Bibli

30

38

2

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87

Introduction

Route 87 is located between Mont Rouis and Saint-Marc 23_ It is one of the most
impoverished sectors in the poorest country in the western hemisphere~the Republic of
Haiti. At a glance, this area presents itself as a dessert waste land: however it is inhabited
by roughly sixty (60) children and their parents. Formerly unbeknownst by my relatives
in Mont Rouis and their neighbors, the people of Route 87 have managed to survive on
about 70- 80% less of what the average Haitian has. With the lack of access to a
biomedical clinics/hospitals, or a local voodoo priest/ priestess/doctor, the locals have
seemed to acquire their own culture of healing methods. Their own culture of medicine,
devoid of the learned, broad, artificial, rapid and predictable convoluted nature of
traditional western medicine, and the inherited, personal, dual, thorough, and
unpredictable nature of traditional Haitian medicine.

The History of the Republic of Haiti

The native Arawak Amerindians - who inhabited the island of Hispaniola when it
was founded by Columbus in 1492 - were nearly annihilated by Spanish settlers within 25
years. In the early 17th century, the French also established a presence on Hispaniola. In
1697, Spain ceded to the French the western third of the island- Haiti. The French colony
became one of the wealthiest in the Caribbean, based on forestry and sugar-related
industrics 1• However, it became so only through the heavy importation of African slaves
and considerable environmental degradation. Haiti's nearly half million slaves revolted

3

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
under Toussaint L'Ouverture, in the late 18th century. Following a prolonged struggle,
Haiti became the first black republic to declare its independence in 1804. For most of its
history Haiti has been plagued by political violence. Currently, it is the poorest country in
the Western Hemisphere.

Occupying one-third of the island of Hispaniola, Haiti is located in the Caribbean
Ocean. Haiti has a current population of 8 million. Bordered by Atlantic Ocean on the
North, and the Caribbean Sea on the South, Hispaniola is of a tropical climate. The
country is populated with about 8 million inhabitants and has the lowest per capita
income in the Western hemisphere. Poverty is as a result of a matrix of overpopulation,
high unemployment rate (60%), high and accelerating inflation rate, high illiteracy rate
(55%), destruction of natural resources, no industry or exports, and little viable industrial
and government infrastructure.

25

This has led to extremely high infant mortality and

child death rates, and short adult life spans. The health status of Haitians is in the bottom
20% of nations worldwide, hence the full life expectancy of the Haitian is 52.1 and 57.3
years for men and women, respectively.

The History of Haitian Medicine

"The Flower of the Antilles" 25 (as they called it) was blessed in almost in every
facet by nature. For many years, however it has been exploited by man with little regard
for anything else than profit. For 292 years, slave1y pervaded the island. With the slave

4

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
trade came every type of African disease that began to take root in Haitian soil, and
customs, like voodooism that hindered rational disease prevention.

Haitian was under the control of the French government. Disease caused such
ravages in the French army that it led to their eventual defeat 25 • And, the island gained its
independence in 1804 upon the death of the French commander due to the infection of
yellow fever.

Among the rural regions the populations suffered from malaria, yaws, and
intestinal parasites. During 60 years of exploitation by the Spanish, several inhabitants
died from forced labor, murder, and disease. Smallpox (only disease not brought from
Africans, but from Caucasians) was the main cause of death for some 200,000 within 10
years of the arrival of Christopher Columbns in 1492. Yaws was the greatest physical
curse to Haiti. It was referred to as "the blood brother of European syphilis, if not the
same disease modified by age incidence, social environment, and racial difference."

25

.

Until 1922 and the advent of Dr. Wilson, this illness did not seem to be recognized for its
severity. He suggested that the first necessity in disease prevention be an improvement in
sanitation.

Biomedicine in Haiti
Although western-influenced medicine is not presently practiced in the town of
Route 87, biomedical clinics and hospitals can be found in surrounding cites, snch as
Pierre Payan. In his book, Medicine and Morality in Haiti: The Contest.for Healing

5

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
Power, Paul Brodwin states that biomedicine is seen as invasive and virtually the source
of all evil in Haiti. Brodwin notes further:

"The narrow physical emphasis of Western medicine, it is claimed, has a powerful
effect on individual subjectivity (Gordon 1988). By locating pathology in the
individual, and treatment in private settings divorced from everyday life,
biomedicine weakens alternate accounts of the social sources of suffering and
health. Biomedical knowledge de-socializes disease, and thereby authorizes the
particular 'truth' that diseases are biological events, arising through impersonal,
natural laws, rather than social ties and interests. Biomedicine thus helps construct
the individual as an autonomous subject -- a center of cognition and feeling -who exists against a background of facts and material objects (Comaroff 1982)"

Few Haitians have access to or choose modern/western medicine when they are ill. Thus,
Haitian medicine is composed mainly of leaf-doctoring and herbal cures. Virtually every
Haitian person would prefer this system of healing to any other and that the primary
reason it is not the dominant system of healing as it is in the developed world, is that it is
too expensive and not as widely available. Although access to a modern medical facility
may be a car or donkey ride away, the typical Haitian much rather serve the Joa ( ancestor
spirits associated with the practice of voodoo) or the local docteur feille (leaf doctor) in
there search for healing. In a study comparing the folk medicines of Ozarkians in
Missouri and Haitians, Bonnie Thomas- Stevenson exposes various herbs and their

6

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
similar uses within the two cultures. A chart of these herbs and uses can be viewed in the
index.

There is a strong emphasis placed on the blood in the body in traditional Haitian
medicine. Besides the instinctual, the blood is watched by looking into the eyes, checking
the fingernails, behind one's ears and through skin eruptions and bleeding. Alterations in
coloration, volnrne, quantity, directionality, temperature and pwity of their blood raises
much concern within this community.

A practitioner of western/biomedicine in Haiti is usually a person of middle and
upper class members of society. They are often the ones that can afford the expensive
tuition of Haitian schools. To train, students must enroll into a domestic or international
medical school that concentrates on western medical practices.

Folk Medicine in Haiti

· In Medicine and Morality in Haiti: Contest fiJr Healing Power, Paul Brod win
exposes that a Haitian patient must first consider to what extent that his/her actions may
be responsible for the illness that he/she is experiencing. This notion of a patient
contributing to his/her susceptibility to illness is revealed when Brodwin introduces
illness in the Haitian culture as "Illness of God" and "Illness of Satan." 8 The criterion
that divides the two is based on whether the illness can be cures by biomedical practices.
An Illness of God is considered of natural causes where no fault or blame falls on the sick

7

The Culture ofHaitiau Medicine: Route 87
individual. Hence, such an illness is deemed morally neutral. These illnesses are curable
via biomedical practices.

A sickness of Satan can not be healed by biomedicine. There are three manners in
which it is believed that an illness of Satan can be healed--the Roman Catholic Strategy,
Voodoo Strategy, and Fundamentalist Protestant Strategy.

8

The Roman Catholic Strategy position can go either way, but usually seems to
decide the patient is an innocent victim. The manner in which illness is handled is
through prayer and exorcisms of evil spirits. The Voodoo Strategy centralizes on the
notion of a "sent sickness"-an infirmity sent unto a person as a curse. It is believed that
a patient with such a sickness may well have done something rather vile to have induced
someone to send it. Hence Haitians that use this method of healing, focus on driving out
the "sent sickness" with the help of a houngan or mambo (voodoo priest or priestess,
respectively .8The lwa ( spirits of ancestors) are also involved in this healing process. The
hougan or mambo is often possessed with them during a ceremony. The Fundamentalist
Protestant Strategy assumes that the patient is guilty of some wickedness most likely of
not having given up the lwa, the practice of voodoo or the closely associated religion of
Catholicism, for these are taken by the fundamentalists as a serious moral failing. These
views prove to be contradictory in believing what causes an lllness of Satan, however it is
quite common for people to utilize several healing strategies at the same time.

8

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87

Disease in Haiti

The impoverished and often unsanitary conditions of several areas in Haiti, lead
to various types of infections. A person can become infected with an illness via insect or
animal bites, the air, from unsanitary water or foods, or sexual transmission.

39

Insect infections include Malaria, Dengue, Yellow Fever, Encephalitis (from
mosquitoes), Mansonellosis (from biting midges), and Typhus (from lice and fleas).
Dogs, cats, and other domestic and wild animals can transmit Rabies through bites and
scratches. Brucellosis, "Q" fever, and Anthrax are found n goats, sheep and cattle.
Respiratory tract infections include colds, influenza, strep throat, tuberculosis and
sinusitis. Meningitis is transmitted directly through droplets from the nose and throat of
infected people. Sexually transmitted diseases include gonorrhea, syphilis, genital warts,
herpes, hepatitis B infection, and infection with HIV/AIDS. Other diseases include
hookworms, whipworms, snail fever (Schisosomiasis), and mud fever (Leptosirosis)

30

.

Lymphaticfilariasis (LF)

Lymphatic filariasis (LF) is a disease of the tropics caused by infection with any of
several round, thread-like parasitic worms. It is a debilitating and parasitic disease
transmitted from one person to another by infected mosquitoes. A disease closely related
to poverty, LF has not affected anyone in the town ofRonte 87, and this phenomenon is
not yet explained. Most commonly, the infection is due to a parasite that resides in the

9

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
lymph system. LF is a principal cause of disability in over eighty (80) countries and
territories. It affects people from 39 countries Africa, 3 in the Eastern Mediterranean, 8 in
Mekong, 9 in South Asia, and 7 within the Americas.

13

More than one billion individuals

live at risk of infection, and it has already led to the disability of 120 million people.
Withiu the Americas, Costa Rica, Suriname, and Trinidad and Tobago displaying great
progress towards complete absence ofLF among their inhabitants. Of the remainder,
Haiti ranks as one of four countries (along with Brazil, Dominican Republic, and
Guyana) that are affected with ongoing lymphatic filariasis (LF) transmission.
Treatments of LF also include a dosage of medicine that kills circulating larvae and
adult worms, soap and water and skin care to prevent secondary infections, and elevation,
exercises, and pressure bandages to reduce swelliug. However, further action needs to be
taken to aid Haiti out of their impoverished state. After research, I have found that both
the economy and medical systems have to be improved simultaneously iu order for any
changes to take hold, for poverty had a direct negative impact on Haiti's medical system.
I propose three new methods of research on achieving the goal of helping Haitian citizens
fight against illnesses like LF and live healthier and longer lives. We need to explore the
relation between the Haitian diet and obesity iu discovering genetic factors that may
predispose Haitians to LF. Secondly, excess research should be performed to further
reveal the correlation between poverty and LF. Lastly, it is important examine spiritual,
supernatural, and psychological components ofLF that may exist.

Once infected with LF, the adult wom1 lives in the person's lymph vessels. The
females release large numbers of very small worm larvae, which circulate iu an infected

10

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
person's bloodstream. When the person is bitten by a mosquito, the insect can ingest the
larvae of the parasite. This permits the parasite to develop within the mosquito and can be
spread to other persons via the mosquito's bite. After the bite the cycle begins again; as
the larvae passes through the skin, travels through the lymph vessels and develop into
adults with a life expectancy of 7 years. The parasite responsible for LF in Haiti is the
Wucheria bancrofti spread mainly by the Culex mosquito. The Brugia malayi, and the

Brugia timori (found in Southeast Asia) are two other parasites that cause filariasis.

Long-term exposure and repeated infections can cause severe damage to the lymph
system and canse devastating complications. Because most of the signs and the
symptoms of filariasis are caused as a consequence of the adult worms living in the
lymph system, tissue damage caused by the worms restricts the normal flow of the lymph
fluid. Symptoms can appear between 5-18 months after contamination. Indications of LF
are usually swelling, scarring, and infections (mostly in the legs and groin). LF is rarely
fatal; however it can lead to recurring fevers, severe inflammation of the lymph system,
and a lung condition called Tropical Pulmonary Eosinophilia (TPE). It can also lead to
Elephantiasis: a condition that causes the legs to become grossly swollen 13 . This causes
long-term disfigurement, and decreased mobility. In addition, LF can lead to a
disfiguring enlargement of the scrotum called Testicular hydroccle.

There is 85% of Haiti's population that live in areas at risk ofLF transmission.
Haitians view illness in one of four ways. Illness can be attributed to natural causes
outside the body such as cold, heat, winds, or humeral imbalance. Haitians also believe

11

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
that alterations in eating habits may cause illness. Injunction with the belief that a
weakened relationship with God causes a weakening of the body, illness is also viewed as
malediction or punishment from God. Lastly, some illnesses are thought to be a cause of
expedition, or "sent illness". However, these can be further categorized into Illness of

God, or Illness of"Satan. An Illness of God refers to illness considered to be morally
neutral where no blame falls on the sick. It is "natural" and can be treated by biomedical
practices. An Illness of Satan cannot be healed by biomedicine and may be viewed as a
curse or "sent sickness". Physical deformities, such as that caused by LF, are thought to
be the result of a spell brought on by an angry spirit that may have been conjured by an
enemy30 .

Limited access to basic healthcare needs (clean water, immunizations,
prenatal/obstetric care, or antibiotics) has been very influential on the Haitian perception
of health and illness

30

.

Thus, a reliance on folk and spiritual explanations and treatments

for illness may be the only option that they have ever possessed. Most likely a Haitian
would have tried some traditional remedies before going to a cosmopolitan health care
source, for the use modern healthcare sources fro treatment is very uncommon. The use
of traditional or magic-religious measures for treatment is most prevalent. These
traditions are: Eating well (being of a plump size), sleeping well, keeping warm,
exercising and keeping clean are important in avoiding weakness, maintaining the
equilibrium between "hot" and "cold" factors, enemas for the purpose of cleansing the
inner body from impurities, herbal teas and massage are used for treatment in the early
stages of illness, spiritual and Voodoo practices are used to prevent harm and illness.

12

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87

The Lymphatic Filariasis Support Center at the Rollins School of Public Health in
Georgia, noted that the percentage of people at risk to LF in Haiti is 75%. The percentage
of the population that is effected currently is 30%. Madsen V. Beau De Rochars et al.
state that virtually the entire country is at risk after extensive tests and research of 22, 3 65
children from over 50-250 schools in the area. More than 50% of Haitian preschoolers
are malnourished which leave them more susceptible to contracting chronic illnesses such
as LF. The disease is virtually undetectable in children and little is known about its
clinical manifestations in the pediatric population. The development of the worms are
rather slowly in the lymphatic system, thus infection is not usually apparent until four or
five years of age. However, swollen lymph glands may be observed as early as two years
of age. The recent use of ultrasound equipment is the can detect at an earlier stage. It is at
about seven years of age when 30% of infected children will begin to show ultrasounddetectable, irregular ballooning of lymphatic ducts and swollen lymph glands.

At the age of 13, girls start to exhibit the clinically visible signs of infection of the
leg's lymph vessels. They are predisposed to lymphoedema-an abnormal accumulation
oflymph fluid in the tissues causing the swelling of a limb, following further cumulative
damage to the lymphatic drainage system. The condition can worsen to a painful and
disfiguring swelling of the leg, arm, breast, or genitals called Elephantiasis. This
condition can lead up to several times the normal size with thickening of the skin in
adulthood. Boys display clinically visible signs at the age of eleven. Like girls, boys
experience the aforementioned symptoms ofLF. However, most commonly boys exhibit

13

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
the ballooning of the lymphatic vessels in their scrotum. At the age of 13, hydrocele may
start to develop. This is a fluid- filled, balloon-like enlargement of the sacs arouud the
testes. At adulthood, scrotal nodules often develop, and further infection can lead to the
massive enlargement of the scrotum and gross deformation of the penis.

LF remains prevalent also due to a lack of advanced methods and medical tools
and equipment in Haiti. Thomas G. Streit, Research Assistant Professor at the University
of Notre Dame in Indiana, has partaken in primarily field-base research in Haiti, and
worked collaboratively with ministry officials in the neighboring Dominican Republic.
Haiti suffers from the highest hemispheric prevalence of the disease (up to 60% among
focal populations), and as a primary focus of efforts to discern and fine-tuue effective
elimination strategies over the next few years. Streit states: "Because elimination tools
cnrrently available can target only an immature stage of the etiologic agent Wucheria

bancrofii as well as the vector, control and elimination programs will reqnire indicators
of success or failure during the very long-term control campaigns necessitated by the 8
year life span of the adult parasite reservoir." Thus, he heads a pilot community control
program involving mass chemotherapy for the°interruption of transmission.

The Lymphatic Filariasis Support Center has set the goals of eliminating LF from
Haiti, and decreasing suffering from and worsening ofLF-related disability. There is yet
a vaccine to be discovered for Filariasis so, the organization's objectives are to provide
mass treatment so that all areas with prevalence greater than 0.1 % will be treated by
2008, facilitate behavior change among infected individuals, and provide the de-worming

14

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
benefits of albendazole to endemic communities, which will promote the healthy growth
of children. In achieving these objectives, they plan to expand mass drug administration
(MDA) campaigns, complete morbidity surveys, increase the number of communitybased support groups, and continue operational research to optimize patient care and,
monitoring and evaluation techniques.

The Ministry of Public Health (MOPH) has constructed a national coordinating
center for the LF program, joined with four (4) technical subcommittees. The methods
are mass treatment, clinical care, social mobilization, and a once-yearly dosage
albendazole and diethylcarbamazine (DEC) pills, or DEC-fortified salt. The mass drug
administration (MDA) campaigns have been active in Leogane, Haiti since 2000. The
current program (2003-2008) aims to treat ~6 million people world-wide. In the attempt
to interrupt transmission in three implementation unit, DEC-fortified salt is used. LF
elimination programs exhibit promise to reducing the burden of filarial infection. In the
study discussed in The Leogane, Haiti Demonstration Project: Decreased Microfilarema

and Program Costs Ajier Three Years ofMass Drug Administration, it was observed that
after only three rounds ofDEC-albendazole treatment, residents ofLeogane, Haiti
experienced dramatic reductions in both filarial and geohehninth infections while
achieving concurrent gains in program cost and efficiency. As a result, broad public
benefits are being realized through the program's implementation. David G. Addiss et al.
note that single-dose ivermectin can greatly reduce the concentration of W bancrofti
rnicrefilaria in the blood for 6-24 months. This decreases the uptake of the parasite by the
mosqnitos. It was discovered fnrther that children that were simultaneously treated with

15

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
ivermectin and albendazole seem to be more effective than ivermectin alone. In a study
conducted to assess filarial infection levels in the mosquito (Culex quinquefasciatus)
through polymerase chain reaction (PCR), David S. Goodman finds that a single round of
mass treatment would have a significant impact on transmission of lymphatic filariasis.

For social mobilization, posters, flipcharts, radio spots, songs and lymphedema
treatment materials have been modeled in Haitian Creole (less formal than French), for
the literacy rate is 48% for males, 42% for females. In addition, a simple, sensitive and
specific test for antigen- detection test is available. This is called the !CT. It can detect
infection within minutes, and be administered any time of the day (unlike previous tests).

To assure that health workers had the appropriate experience in dealing with LF
patients, conferences and training sessions were held in for private physician in Haiti. In
2002, a conference was held focusing on the epidemiology of the disease and the
objectives of the national elimination program. A training manual was also developed for
physicians-in-training to inform them regarding LF and the lmphedema and urogenital
disorders that can ensue. Within that same year, Haiti hosted an international conference
on urogenital ultrasound and surgery. There was a total of 15 training sessions. 2,300
health care workers were informed and educated about the different components of the
program.

There are also geographical components to explaining the prevalence ofLF in
Haiti. Haiti's terrain is rather mountainous. In the article, Community- and Individual-

16

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87

Level Determinants ofWuchereria bancrofti Infection in Leogane Commune, Haiti,
Heather A. Boyd et al. state that LF infection prevalence decreased with increasing
altitude. The greatest force of infection is present in sectors of Leogane that are below 70
meters above sea levels; however LF is not exempt from communities at higher altitudes.

The Arrival of the HIV/AIDS Epidemic (according to Paul Farmer)

The HIV/AIDS epidemic is widely spread throughout the land of Haiti. The Lack
of medical care and access has left much of the illness undetected by many. The people
of Route 87 are very much impoverished, and lacking in medical access as well, however
they have not had an HIV/AIDS death in its records since the introduction of external aid.
Paul Farmer does an excellent job of explaining how the epidemic has spread throughout
other areas in Haiti, and its effect on the nation.

The U,es of Haiti by Paul Farmer is a prime sample of an ethno medical approach
to medical anthropology. The ethno medical approach is used by Farmer to adequately

17

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
expose the manners in which North American (principally the United States) society has
made impressionable contributions to the current impoverished state of Haiti. He uses
various examples of occurrences between the two governments and cultures to verify his
claim. For instance, he emphasizes the current of events after the 1991, Cedras coup
d'etat of President Aristide throughout the entire piece of literature, and describes from
first hand accounts how American govermnent further increased the already declining
state of Haiti.

Farmer states that the coup of 1991 (the plot to overthrow Jean-Bertrand Aristide
as President) was expected. Preceding his election in December 1990, the supporters of
the previous president, J can-Claude Duvalier, were planning the rebellion. In the very
early parts of his tenn, Aristide established much economic reform. During the next
months, he was focused on discouraging Haiti's dependence on the industrialized
countries of the North. Focusing on ceasing the drug trade (i.e. the zombie powder),
Aristide ignited fury even among his once supporters. Stopping the drug transshipment
through Haiti would directly affect Haiti's class of elites, and they would not stand for it.

Indeed the rebels achieved their goal; Aristide was forced out of office and the
country, Supreme Judge Jean-Jacques Honorat was his replacement, and the General
Raoul Cedras and the army were governing the country via terrorism.

During this time, the once difficult Haitian life became much more challenging,
even unbearable. Farmer explains that many Haitians were fleeing to seek refuge in

18

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
America. " Sadly, the Haitian people find themselves in a position of needing to reach the
hearts and minds of North Americans and to persuade them to change the policies that
affect Haitians so directly," alleged Fanner. However, the Bush administration adamantly
stood against harbming them. As refugees escaped their country on boats, they were
forced to return by the U.S. Coast Guard, or capn1red and sent to Guantanamo (a U.S.
naval base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba) for treatment for HIV/AIDS. At the time, the virus
was spreading rather quickly and much of the American press was responsible for
spreading the myths that stigmatizes Haiti as the source of the virus. They displayed
"Haiti as a source of infection or boat people, Haiti as the typical other, Haiti as
confirmation of the worst racist theories, Haiti as exemplifying a 'cultural problem' ... "

15

(216). Although Farmer assures that all of the evidence points to the syndrome being

brought to the island by North Americans or by Haitians returning from North America
through sexual transmission and contaminated blood transfusions 15 (280), "the press drew
upon readily available images of filthy squalor, voodoo, and boatloads of disease
'disease-ridden,' or economic' refugees." Researchers like Jeffrey Viera observed that
magic rituals sometimes involve the human or animal transfers of blood and secretions.
He also learned that many voodoo priests are homosexual men that are in a position of
power to satisfy their sexual desires in urban areas. Farmer argues that "there was never
any evidence that the organism causing AIDS was endemic to Haiti, nor has there ever
been the slightest evidence to back the idea that that voodoo practices played a role in
transmission of an infectious agent"

15

(280).

19

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
In his attempt to better exhibit the reality ofHaiti·s chaotic situation after the
coup, Farmer shared the stories/testimonies of three Haitians that he had known since he
began his work on the island in 1985. Two of them were Yolande Jean and Accphie
Joseph. Yolande Jean was married with two children and a political refugee who was
detained for a year at Guantanamo. Farmer explains that on her travels by sea to America,
she collided with the U.S. immigration policy enforcers. They forced her and other
refugees out of the boat, took their possessions and documents and burned them, and sent
them to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. There, the U.S. had established a concentration camp
that Yolande conveys (to Farmer in an interview) the horrid conditions of the camp.
"Conditions in the camp were grim," transmitted Farmer, "the inmates lived in tents and
other makeshift shelters on a landing strip, surrounded by barbed wire .... infested with
rats, scorpions, and snakes 15 (222)." The people were treated like animals, not even some
animals were treated this badly. Yolande's situation was completely different from the
HIV-positive detainees at the Santiago de las Vegas sanatorium. The women there were
well nourished, had movie nights, and mother's day celebrations. Yolande, and her fellow
Haitians were fed spoiled foods that were often infested with maggots. Although
Guantanamo was owned by the U.S., the Bush administration declared that U.S. policy
did not apply to Guantanamo, and there was nothing that they could do alter the situation.
In eight months following the coup, 34,000 Haitians had been intercepted on the high
seas by the U.S. Coast Guard, and the majority sent to Guantanamo.

Acephie Joseph battled with AIDS until the spring of 1992. She was raised in the
poor area of Do Kay, Haiti. It was unknown in the rural areas as Kay of the new illness,

20

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
AIDS, for they were burdened by increasing political violence and unremitting poverty 15
(264). Through her story, Farmer exposes the difficulties and risks-- more so health risks- associated to poverty. Several poor women in Haiti have difficulties going to school and
getting jobs, thus they must rely on marriage to escape poverty. Farmer describes "in
rural Haiti, entrenched poverty makes the salaried man ever so much more attractive" 15
(267). Following that credence, Acephie fell for a young manied soldier and they became
sexual partners. In less than a month, Acephie did not see him anymore, and soon heard
that he was sick and in the care of his wife. Many could not understand his illness, and
Farmer informs the reader that "it was widely agreed that he was a victim of sorcery, a
'sent sickness'

15

(268). 'Expedition of the dead' is a model of illness associated with

voodoo. Haitians believe a sickness can be sent to another through a hougan or mambo
(voodoo priest, or priestess). Many people in Kay thought it might have been his wife
that sent an illness upon him. He died, and a couple of years later Acephie died of AIDS
infection at the age of 27.

Route 87

Route 87 is between the areas of Mont Rouis and Saint- Marc, near the city of
Pierre Payan. From the city of Mont Rouis, the location of Fondation de Secours
Internationale Hai"ti's storage bank, the trnck ride require $300 goud (approximately
equivalent to the American dollar) in gasoline (a result oflong distance, and higher gas
price rates) 23_ Although it is near the ocean, the sector does not have direct access to
clean water. As a result, the ground is dry and rocky. There is very little vegetation, with

21

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
the exception of the skimpy trees that protrude out of the brick-like soil. Escaping the
beat of the tropical sun seems virtually impossible, for shade is scarce beneath the gauzy
leaves of the trees. The arid territory doesn't allow for much farming; however the locals
have managed to harvest watermelons there, and not much of anything else. The land is
so unfruitful that even animals stray away from it. The only animals spotted are the few
goats that have been domesticated by the locals.

The history of the Route 87 locals is quite interesting and bizarre. The first people
to arrive the town were Haitian natives from different areas of the country that were in
search of employment. Years ago, Route 87 was the site for a big manufacturing factory.
Young and old traveled there for work with the intentions of providing for their families
back home, or preparing funds for their futures. Except for the wealthy that were able to
afford housing on the shorefront, the workers built small shacks to house in during their
time away from home 23 • Seemingly, they thought these shacks to be temporary--- until
they could earn enough money to return home and provide for their families. However,
for most of the workers, their advancement towards a better life was stopped short.

For some reason, or another, the factory was forced to shut down, leaving many
families without a source of income. As a result, those that could afford it headed back
home to their families. Others couldn't; either they didn't have the means or a family to
go to 23 Thus, the poor and the abandoned remained in Route 87 with no other beam of
hope in sight.

22

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
Overtime, they formed families; bearing many children. Route 87 had evolved
into a society that had acquired its own culture with social status classifications all of its
own. The wealthiest member of this society is Esther. She owns a radio, a donkey, and is
able to travel to Pierre Payan to work as a Madam Sarah (women that sell goods at the
markets). She also owns the biggest shack and houses many people there. However,
existing in a society composed of impoverished and homeless, the determinants of what
defines a family of wealth in actors other than the level of education achieved, the
amount of money possessed, the type of car driven, nor the brands of clothes worn. With
the basic levels of education there is to offer, many of the locals aren't granted the
privilege of learning a trade. No trade means no work in Haiti, and no work means no
money. Hence, the people of Route 87 have little material things that exemplify the
achievement of purpose and worth. However, one thing seemed to stand out in this
connuunity: there are many children. The average family has 6-8 children each. It seems
that the connuunity has adopted its own way of portraying success, apart from the
remainder of the Haitian culture. The amount of children per family exemplifies success
because it assures that the family lineage will be preserved, and increase the being well
taken care of when they came of old age.

Over the years, families grew to a grand total of27

11

,

yet there were no new

housing developments. The families were forced to share the living space with each other
to accommodate for the large amounts of children. The largest shack is shared amongst
seven (7) families. The people are practically lying down upon each other. Such close
proximity continues to contribute to the increase ofbirths23 Today, the shacks are

23

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
insufficient for all the family members to reside, therefore some of the older members
sneak unto the porches of the wealthy, way by the waterfront, for shelter at night. If they
are caught, they could face the penalty of death for trespassing.

Why would wealth neighbors allow their poor counterparts to live in such misery
without reaching out to them a helping hand? That question boggled my mind for days.
The residents by the shorefront went out of there way to avoid contact with Route 87
locals. Instead of traveling to and from the city by car, they travel by boat; away from the
Route 87 roadside. However, in considering the current state of poverty and havoc that
Haitian citizens find themselves in daily, it is easy to see that the entire country is filled
with people in need. When a Haitian compares his lifestyle to that of an American, he
becomes immediately aware of his unforttmate state, and believes that in attaining
success he must retain all his possession to himself and his family members. Besides the
close neighbor relationships found in a "lakou" 3 (a focused area of houses that are
inhabited by close friends and family members), the sharing of food and possessions is
rare. Even rarer is the acceptance of help from other Haitians. Therefore, the people of
Route 87 are left to fend for themselves independent of the help of their neighbors.

However, it seems that the community members had divine hand providing for
them. The current mission administrators have recently been informed that another
American church /non-profit group, like the Fondation de Secours Internationale Haiti,
has reached out to the locals of Route 87 via a church in Haiti. Through that mission, the
church was able to begin a small school and church for the area. At the school, the

24

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
children are taught to speak and write in French and Creole. Yet, they have been very
inconsistent with the aid to the sector. The organizers F ondation de Secours
Internationale Haiti speculate that the monies intended to help those of Route 87 were
used in other ways. When that mission learned Fondation de Secours Internationale
Haiti, they have returned to the site. The director of the mission, Marie Lolita Pierre,
informed me that they have returned for selfish reasons. They are afraid of having the
land owned and controlled by another organization. Thus, they have slowly began the
development of new hosing for them, but the lack of funds has dramatically slowed down
the process and proves that this mission can not aid the people of Route 87 alone.

Therefore, Fondation de Secours Internationale Hai'ti, continue their outreach to
the community. They focus on supplying them the essential things that will promote good
nutrition and health; things such as food (both cooked and raw), toothbrushes and
toothpaste, clothes, shoes, soaps and shampoos, lotions and pomades, and over-thecounter medications (i.e. aspirin). For the children, they also bring toys, and school
supplies. When possible, the mission also distributes money to each family. Virtually
useless within their society, the money helps with the travel expenses to the city when
needed.

Methods
At the onset of my research, I set out to compare the healing practices/ methods of
Route 87 to that of what is already known of traditional Haitian healing practices/
methods. I planned to travel to the site, however a sudden lack of funds and the news of

25

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
tourist kidnappings and concern for my safety refrained me from doing so.

Upon my arrival to the site, I intended to interview 25 of 38 of Route 87's adults
on various questions that would render me more insight and concrete evidence on their
attitudes toward illness and their treatments of them. Most of all, I wanted to understand
how the people were able to remain in a state of health when the conditions that they live
in work completely against it. After collecting the data, the responses of these 25 adults
were to be evaluated and compared to each other. With these statistics, I planned to
formulate a conclusion about their definition of illness, and healing rituals that they
engaged in to treat them. Next, I would compare their views of illness to the traditional
Haitian view of illness as either an illness of God or an illness if Satan. Furthermore, the
healing methods would be compared and contrasted. Then, I would attempt to make a
conclusion as to why disease was so uncommon in Route 87.

Instead, I interviewed the missions outreach coordinator, Reverend Pierre Sultan
Dorsainvil (in Haiti), and the missions director, Sister Marie Lolita Pierre (in the US) to
better evaluate the views of illness and treatment practices of the Route 87 locals. With
the data collected, the views of illness and healing practices are compared.

Discussion
Interview w/ Missions Outreach Coordinator

From my phone interview with Fondation de Secours Internationale Haiti's

26

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
missiorn outreach coordinator, Reverend Pierre Sultan Dorsainvil, I gained much more
insight into Route 87' s medical system. Reverend Dorsainvil has worked with the town
for the last three years, from the beginning of this initiative. He has served the
community in several ways. He is the main distributor of the goods that come from the
states. He controls the import of the goods from the cargo station, and assures that all the
goods get to the town in its entirety. He also is a par-time Sunday school teacher at the
church, aud tutor for the children.

Reverend Dorsainvil notified me that the town had no local clinic and that the
closest one was in the city of Pierre Payan -- a trip that would last a 4 to 6-hour walk/
donkey ride. Travel to Pierre Payan is very expensive, and the hospital's services must be
paid for up front. So, only in grave instances do the people transport the sickly to that
hospital. Most serious cases are usually concerning young children that are in dire need
of external medical attention 11 . Women are not even transported during child labor.
Reverend Dorsainvil trusts that there is a midwife in the community, but has not met her
yet. In one case, an elderly man experienced a stroke that has left one side of his body
paralyzed. No ohe bothered to send him to the hospital for treatment 23_ Instead, the
connnunity has treated him through their own methods. Still paralyzed, the elder still
seems alert and healthier than expected.

The community's displacement from the remainder of the country has caused
them to form a substitute form of medicine that doesn't really match that of traditional
biomedical or Haitian healing practices. Their traditions of healing centralize on herbal

27

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
extracts and teas. Recently, pain relievers (such as aspirin) have been introduced by the

Fondation de Secours Internationale Haiti mission workers. They taught the locals when
and how to ingest the medication. Before then, they would have to endure a painful
headache, stomach ache, or joint pain by the consumption of tea, bed rest. Despite their
limited access to advanced medical techniques and processes, the people of Route 87
rarely experience deaths as observed during the past three years. Yet, recently the
community mourned the loss of a child that was unable to make it to the hospital time23_
It was not disclosed to Reverend Dorsainvil of what her sickness was, but it was evident
that the illness was more potent than what the soothing nature of the herbs could handle.

According to Reverend Dorsainvil and the Sister Pierre, the community does not
engage in voodoo practices. Therefore, there is no hougan or mambo there to aid with
what would be considered a "sent sickness." This leads me to hypothesize that the people
may categorize illness much differently than the remainder of the people throughout the
land. Biomedicine is expensive and scarcely available and the notion of Illness of God
and Illness of Satan may not even exist. There is still much research to be done in Route
87 in the attainment ofa complete understanding of their medical system.

Conclusion and Plans for Future Research

From what is currently known about Route 87' s medical system, it can be safely
assumed that there it differs from that of the surrounding cities. Since the inception of the

28

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
Fondation de Secours Internationale Hai'ti' mission, there have been dramatic

improvements in the appearance e of the locals. The hair color of the children has
darkened as a result of a decrease in malnutrition, everyone's personal hygiene has
improved, and they are acquiring wardrobes.

I intend to further my research of Route 87's medical system. There are many
questions that have been left unanswered-- What kinds of illnesses are experienced?
What are the remedies and healing processes that exist, and how have they evolved over
time? Why the practice of voodoo is abandoned, and is there a substitute? How is illness
categorized?, etc .. that I intend to find the answers to and discuss in a later report.

29

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87

Bibliography
1. About.com. <Website: http://geography.about.com/library/cia/blchaiti.htm>

2. Addiss, David G., Michael J. Beach, Thomas G. Streit, Suzanne Lutwick,
Fredrick H. LeConte, Jack G. Lafontant, Allen W. Hightower, and Patrick
Lammie.
1997. Randomised placebo-controlled comparison ofivermectin and albendazole
alone and in combination for Wuchereria bancrofti microfilaraemia in Haitian
children. The Lance/et, 350: 480-84.

3. Arthur, Charles and Dash, Michael, 1999. "Haiti Anthology: Libete" London:
Latin America Bureau.

4. Baird, Jill B., Jacky Louis Charles, Thomas G. Streit, Jacquelin M. Roberts,
David G. Addiss, and Patrick Lammie.
2002. Reactivity to Bacterial, Fungal, and Parasite Antigens in Patients with
Lymphedema and Elephantiasis. Am. J. Med. Hyg., 66 (2): 163-69.

5. Beach, Michael J., Thomas Sreit, David G. Addiss, Rosette Prospere, Jacquelin
M. Roberts, and Patrick Lammie.
1999. Assessment of Combined Ivermectin and Albendazole for Treatment of
Intestinal Helminth and Wuchereria Bancrofii, Am. J. Med. Hyg., 60 (3): 479-86.

30

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
6. Beach, Michael J., Thomas G. Streit, Robin Houston, Warwick A. May, David G.
Addiss, and Patrick J. Lamie
2001. Short Report: Documentation of Iodine Deficiency in Haitian School
Children: Implication for Lymphatic Filariasis Elimination in Haiti. Am. J. Trap.
Med. Hyg, 64 (I, 2), 56-57.

7. Boyd, Heather A., Lance A. Waller, W. Dana Flanders, Michael J. Beach, J. Sony
Sivilus, Rodrigue Lovince, Patrick J. Lammie, and David G. Addiss.
2004. Community- and Individual- Level Determinants ofWuchereria bancrofti
Infection in Leogane Commune, Haiti. Am. J. Trap. Med. Hyg., 70 (3): 266-272.

8. Corbett, Bob, 1997. "Review of Paul Brodwin's Medicine and Morality in Haiti:
The Contest for Healing Power," <Bob Corbet's Home Page:
http://www.websteruniv.edu/~corbetre/haiti/bookreviews/brodwin.htm>, 11-2006.

9. Coreil, Jeannine, Gladys Mayard, and David Addiss.
2003. Support groups for women with lymphatic filariasis in Haiti. SEB Research,
TDR 0 (I): 1-50.

10. Cuenca, Karen T., M. Elizabeth Halloran, and Patrick J. Lannnie,
2004. Assessment of Families for Excess Risk ofLymphedema of the Leg in a
Lymphatic Filariasis-Endemic Area. Am. J. Trap. Med. Hyg., 70 (2):185-90.

31

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
11. Directors of Health Promotion and Education. Electronic document,
http://www.dhpe.org/infect/Lymphfil.html, accessed December 18.

12. Dorsainvil, Pierre Sultan, 3-27-2007. Phone Interview.

13. Durrheim, D.N., S. Wynd, B. Liese, and J.O. Gyapong.
2004. Editorial: Lymphatic filariasis endemicity-an indicator of poverty?,
Tropical Medicine and International Health, 9 (8): 843-45.

14. The Emory LF Support Center, 2003. A Generic Protocol for Analyzing the Costs
of Mass Drug Administration Programs for the Elimination of Lymphatic
Filariasis, I (3), 1-26.

15. Farmer, Paul, 1994. "The Uses of Haiti," Monroe, ME: Common Courage Press

16. Fox, Leanne M., Susan F. Wilson, David G. Addiss, Jacky Louis-Charles,
Madsen V. Beau de Rochars, and Patrick Lammie.
2005. Clinical Correlates ofFilarial Infection in Haitian Children: An Association
with Interdigital Leisions, Am. J. Med. Hyg., 73 (4): 759-65.

17.Fox
2005. Ultrasonographic Examination of Haitian Children with Lymphatic
Filariasis: A Longitudinal Assessment in the Context of Antifilarial Drug
Treatment. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg., 72 (5), 642- 48.

32

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87

18. Freeman, R., Patrick Lammie, Robin Houston, Mark D. Lapointe, Thomas G.
Streit, Pieter L. Jooste, Jean Marc Brissau, Jack Guy Lafontant, and David G.
Addiss.
2001. A Community-Based Trial for the Control of Lymphatic Filariasis and
Iodine Deficiency Using Salt Fortified with Diethycarbamazine and Iodine. Am. J.
Trap. Med. Hyg., 65 (6), 856- 71.

19. The Global Alliance to Eliminate Lymphatic Filariasis. Electronic document,

http://www.filariasis.org/resources/whatislf.htm, accessed December 18.

20. Global Alliance to Eliminate Lymphatic Filariasis.
2004. The Socio-Economic Impact of LF and the Program to Eliminate It, 1-6.

21. Goodman, David S., Jean-Nicolas Orelus, Jacqelin M. Roberts, Patrick J.
Lammie, and Thomas G. Streit.
2003. PCR and Mosquito dissection as tools to monitor filarial infection levels
following mass treatment. Fi/aria Journal, 2 (11): 1-9.

22. Helmenstine, Anne Marie.
Natural Mosquito Repellents. Electronic document,
http://chemistry.about.com/cs/howthingswork/a/aa050503a.htm, accessed
December 20.

33

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87

23. The Lymphatic Filariasis Support Center, Electronic document,
http://www.taskforce.org/LFSC/americas/haiti.html, December 18.

24. McLaughlin, Steven L, Jeanne Radday, Marie Carmel Michel, David G. Addiss,
Michael l Beach, Patrick J. Lammie, John Lammie, Richard Rheingans, and Jack
Lafontant.
2003. Frequency, Severity, and Costs of Adverse Reactions Following Mass
Treatment for Lymphatic Filariasis Using Diethylcarbarnazine and Albendazole in
Leogane, Haiti, 2000. Am. J Trap. Med. Hyg., 68 (5), 568- 73.

23. Pierre, Marie Lolita, 5-2-2007. Phone Interview.

24. Punkosdy, George A, David Addiss, and Patrick J. Lammie.
2003. Characterization of Antibody Responses to ·wolbachia Surface Protein in
Humans with Lymphatic Filariasis. Infection and Immunity 71 (9), 5104- 114.

25. Ravenel, M.P. 1930. "History of Haitian Medicine," American Journal ofPublic
Health, New York: Roeber

34

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
26. Rheingans, Richard D., Anne C. Haddix, Mark L. Messonnier, Martin Meltzer,
Gladys Mayard and David G. Addiss.
2004. Willingness to pay for prevention and treatment of lymphatic filariasis in
Leogane, Haiti. Fi/aria Journal, 3 (2), 1-11.

27. Rochars, Madsen V. Beau de, Abdel N. Direny, Jacquelin M. Roberts, David G.
Addiss, Jeanne Radday Michael J. Beach, Thomas G. Streit, Desire Dardith, Jack
Guy Lafontant, and Patrick Lammie.
2004. Community-wide Reduction in Prevalence and Intensity of Intestinal
Heminths as a Collateral Benefir of Lymphatic Filariasis Elimination Programs,
Am. J. Med. Hyg., 71 (4): 466- 70.

28. Rochars, Madsen V. Beau de, M. Denise Milord, Yvan St. Jean, Anne M.
Desormeaux, Jean J. Dorvil, Jack G. Lafontant, David G. Addis, and Thomas G.
Streit.
2004. Geographic Distribution of Lymphatic Filariasis in Haiti. Am. J. Med. Hyg.,
71(5): 598-601.

29. Rochars, Madsen Bean, Sanjat Kanjilal, Abdel N. Direny, Jeanne Radday, Jack G.
Lafontant, Eld Mathieu, Richard D. Rheingans, Anne C. Haddix, Thomas G.
Streit, Michael J. Beach, David G. Addiss, and Patrick J. Lammie.

35

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
2005. The Leogane, Haiti Demonstration Project: Decreased Microfilaria and
Program Costs after Three Years of Mass Drug Administration, Am. J. Med. Hyg.,
73 (5): 888-94.

30. Salisbury
Cultural Competency and Haitian Immigrants. Electronic document,
~http://www.salisbury.edu/nursing/haitiancultcomp/begin.htm, December 12.

31. Seventeeth Programme Report, 2005. Lymphatic filariasis. TDR 2005, 1-5.

32. Streit, Thomas G .. http://www.nd.edu/~biology/streit.shtrnl

33. Thomas- Stevenson, Bonnie, 1991. Ozarkian and Haitian Folk Medicine, <Bob
Corbet's Home Page:

http://www.webster.edu/~corbetre/haiti/misctopic/medicine/ozark.htm>, 11-2006.

34. Dictionary. Webster <Webster: http://webster.com/>.

35. Wilson, Susan F., Jeannette Guarener, Alix L. Valme, Jacky Louis-Charles, Tara
L. Jones, and David G. Addiss.

2004. Histopathologic Improvement with Lymphedema Management, Leogane,
Haiti, Emerging Infectious Diseases, 10 (11).

36

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
36. World Health Organization (WHO) http://www.who.int/en/

37. U.S. Anny Research and Materiel Command
<Website:http://www.usariem.anny.mil/haiti/2start.htrn>

38. U.S. Army Research and Materiel Command
"Infectious Diseases" <Website :http://www. usariem. army .mil/haiti/disease.him>

39. U.S. Army Research and Materiel Command,
"Disease from animals" <Website: http://www.usariem.arrny.mil/haiti/disanirn.htm

40. U.S. Anny Research and Materiel Command, "Diseases from Contact with Soil or
Water"< Website: http://www.usariem.anny.mil/haiti/dissoil.htm

41. U.S. Army Research and Materiel Command, "Diseases from Food and Water
Consumption" <Website: http://www.usariern.anny.mil/haiti/disfood.htm>

42. U.S. Anny Research and Materiel Command, "Diseases from Insects" <Website:
http://www. usariem.arm y .mil/haiti/disinsee. htm>

43. U.S. Army Research and Materiel Command, "Diseases from Other People"
<Website: http://www.usariem.anny.mil/haiti/dispeop.htm>

37

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87

Appendix

wwp.greenwichmeantime.com

2. Map 2

38

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87

3. Haitian Herbs Chart

Herb
Sasparilla

Catnip or catmint

peppermint, spearmint,
lemomnint and horsemint

Treatment
• Used as blood purifier, or promotes cleaning of the
action of the liver, kidney, spleen, and bowels
• Decoction (tea) of the sasoarilla root
• Mild herb that is safe for infants
• Calming properties of catnip, rather than purgative

•
•

Senna

•
•

Red Sage

•
•

•
•
Vervain

•
•
•

Douching

•
•

All of the mints have the effect of soothing
indigestion and quieting nausea
First thing administered when stomach aches
An infusion (tea) of senna is given to expel worms,
reduce biliousness (belching and indigestion), and as
an all-purpose laxative
in Haiti, where worms are a more prevalent problem
among the population, senna is gathered and used for
its febrifuge properties
"Female herb"

an herb found in both locales and is known to be an
emmenagogue, or that which promotes menstrual
flow
the desired result is the instigation of bleeding

increase menstrual flow much better than quinine for
the purposes for which quinine is used
can be used to cause abortion
less violent than quinine (used in the US)

used for general hygiene and curing excessive
discharges.
Decoction made from oak bark

39

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87

4. Map of Major Hospital Locations

Pluralism Presentation Slide Set, 11-2007.

40

The Culture of Haitian Mediciue: Route 87

5. Route 87 mission pictures

The children smile and laugh as they receive their toys.

The locals gather around the mission's truck upon arrival.

41

A visiting preacher comes to speak to the crowd.

Young woman
pregnant with her
third child

42

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87

A crowd of locals stand in front of one of the 3 shacks.

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87

The church is in between the two other shacks.

A small boy stands bare, awaiting provisions from the mission's truck.

44

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87

The women of Mont Rouis prepare the meal for the town of Route 87 (mixed vegetables
and rice w / beans)

45

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87

The locals patiently await a meal.

The children are served first.

46

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87

The children show off their new toys in a group picture.

The mission begins its departure.

47

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87

6. Facts about Haiti

Background:

Location:

Geographic
coordinates:
Map references:
Area:

Area comparative:
Land boundaries:

Coastline:
Maritime claims:

The native Arawak Amerindians - who inhabited the island of Hispaniola
when it was discovered by Columbus in 1492 - were virtually annihilated by
Spanish settlers within 25 years. In the early 17th century, the French
established a presence on Hispaniola, and in 1697, Spain ceded to the
French the western third of the island - Haiti. The French colony, based on
forestry and sugar-related industries, became one of the wealthiest in the
Caribbean, but only through the heavy importation of African slaves and
considerable environmental degradation. In the late 18th century, Haiti's
nearly half million slaves revolted under Toussaint L'OUVERTURE and after
a prolonged struggle, became the first black republic to declare lts
independence in 1804. Haiti has been plagued by political violence for most
of its history. It is the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere.

Caribbean, western one-third of the island of Hispaniola, between the
Caribbean Sea and the North Atlantic Ocean, west of the Dominican
Republic
19 00 N, 72 25 W

Central America and the Caribbean

total: 27,750 sq km
land: 27,560 sq km
water: 190 sq km
slightly smaller than Maryland

total: 360 km
border countries: Dominican Republic 360 km
1,771 km

territorial sea: 12 nm
contiguous zone: 24 nm
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
continental shelf: to depth of exploitation

Climate:

tropical; semiarid where mountains in east cut off trade winds

Terrain:

mostly rough and mountainous

Elevation
extremes:

lowest point: Caribbean Sea O m
highest point: Chaine de la Selle 2,680 m

Natural
resources:

bauxite, copper, calcium carbonate, gold, marble, hydropower

Land use:

arable land: 28.3%
permanent crops: 11.61 %
other: 60.09% (2001)

48

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87

Irrigated land:
Natural hazards:

Environment current issues:

Environment international
agreements:
Geography note:

Population:

Age structure:

750 sq km (1998 est.)
lies in the middle of the hurricane belt and subject to severe storms from
June to October; occasional flooding and earthquakes; periodic droughts
extensive deforestation (much of the remaining forested land is being cleared
for agriculture and used as fuel); soil erosion; inadequate supplies of potable
water
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Law of the Sea,
Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified: Hazardous Wastes
shares island of Hispaniola with Dominican Republic (western one-third is
Haiti, eastern two-thirds is the Dominican Republic)

8,121,622
note: estimates for this country explicitly take into account the effects of
excess mortality due to AIDS; this can result in lower life expectancy, higher
infant mortality and death rates, lower population and growth rates, and
changes in the distribution of population by age and sex than would
otherwise be expected (July 2005 est.)

0-14 years: 42.6% (male 1,741,622/female 1,721,436)
15-64 years: 53.9% (male 2, 137,225/female 2,242,639)
65 years and over: 3.4% (male 124,383/female 154,317) (2005 est.)

Median age:

total: 18.03 years
male: 17 .63 years
female: 18.44 years (2005 est.)

Population
grmNth rate:

2.26% (2005 est.)

Birth rate:
Death rate:
Net migration
rate:
Sex ratio:

Infant mortality
rate:

Life expectancy
at birth:

Total fertility rate:
HIV/AIDS - adult
prevalence rate:

36.59 births/1,000 population (2005 est.)
12.34 deaths/1,000 population (2005 est.)
-1.68 migrant(s )/1,000 population (2005 est.)

at birth: 1.03 male(s}lfemale
under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.95 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.81 male(s)/female
total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (2005 est.)
total: 73.45 deaths/1,000 live births
male: 79.92 deaths/1,000 live births
female: 66.79 deaths/1,000 live births (2005 est.)

total population: 52.92 years
male: 51.58 years
female: 54.31 years (2005 est.)
5.02 children born/woman (2005 est.)
5.6% (2003 est.)

49

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87

HIV/AIDS people living with
HIV/AIDS:

280,000 (2003 est.)

HIV/AIDS deaths:

24,000 (2003 est.)

Nationality:

noun: Haitian(s)
adjective: Haitian

Ethnic groups:

Religions:

Languages:
Literacy:

Country name:

Government
type:

Capital:

black 95%, mulatto and white 5%

Roman Catholic 80%, Protestant 16% (Baptist 10%, Pentecostal 4%,
Adventist 1 %, other 1%), none 1 %, other 3% (1982)
note: roughly half of the population practices Voodoo
French (official), Creole (official)
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 52.9%
male: 54.8%
female: 51.2% (2003 est.)

conventional long form: Republic of Haiti
conventional short form: Haiti
local long form: Republique d'Haiti
local short form: Haiti

elected government

Port-au-Prince

Administrative
divisions:

9 departments (departements, singular - departement); Artibonite, Centre,
Grand 'Anse, Nord, Nord-Est, Nord-Quest, Quest, Sud, Sud-Est

Independence:

1 January 1804 (from France)

National holiday:
Constitution:

Legal system:

Independence Day, 1 January (1804)
approved March 1987; suspended June 1988 with most articles reinstated
March 1989; in October 1991 government claimed to be observing the
constitution; returned to constitutional rule in October 1994
based on Roman civil law system; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage:

18 years of age; universal

Executive
branch:

chief of state: Interim President Boniface ALEXANDRE (since 29 February
2004)
note: Jean-Bertrand ARISTIDE resigned as president on 29 February 2004;
ALEXANDRE, as Chief of the Supreme Court, constitutionally succeeded
Aristide
head of government: Interim Prime Minister Gerald LATORTUE (since 12
March 2004 ), chosen by extraconstitutional Council of Eminent Persons
representing cross-section of political and civic interests
cabinet: Cabinet chosen by the prime minister in consultation with the
president
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term; election last
held 26 November 2000 (next to be held in November 2005); prime minister

50

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87

appointed by the president, ratified by the National Assembly
election results: Jean-Bertrand ARISTIDE elected president; percent of vote Jean-Bertrand ARISTIDE 92%
Legislative
branch:

Judicial branch:
Political parties
and leaders:

Political pressure
groups and
leaders:

International
organization
participation:

bicameral National Assembly or Assemblee Nationa\e consists of the Senate
(27 seats; members elected by popular vote to serve six-year terms; onethird elected every two years) and the Chamber of Deputies (83 seats;
members are elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms); note - the
National Assembly stopped functioning in January 2004 when the terms of all
Deputies and two-thirds of sitting Senators expired; no replacements have
been elected; the President is currently ruling by decree
elections: Senate - last held for two-thirds of seats 21 May 2000 with runoffs
on 9 July boycotted by the opposition; seven seats still disputed; election for
remaining one-third held on 26 November 2000 (next to be held in 2005):
Chamber of Deputies - last held 21 May 2000 with runoffs on 30 July
boycotted by the opposition; one vacant seat rerun 26 November 2000 (next
to be held in November 2005)
election results: Senate - percent of vote by party - NA%; seats by party - FL
26, independent 1; Chamber of Deputies - percent of vote by party - NA%;
seats by party - FL 73, MOCHRENA 3, PLB 2, OPL 1, vacant 1, other minor
parties and independents 3
Supreme Court or Cour de Cassation
Alliance for the Liberation and Advancement of Haiti or ALAH [Reynold
GEORGES]; Assembly of Progressive National Democrats or RDNP [Leslie
MANIGAT]; Ayiti Kapab [Ernst VERDI EU]; Convention for Democratic Unity
or KID [Evans PAUL]; National Congress of Democratic Movements or
KONAKOM [Victor BENOIT]; Nationalist Progressive Revolutionary Party or
PANPRA [Serge GILLES]; Democratic Movement for the Liberation of Haiti
or MODELH [Francois LATORTUE]; Grand Center Right Front coalition
(composed of MON, MRN, and POCH) [Hubert de RONCERAY, Jean
BUTEAU, Osner FEVRY and Marie-Denise CLAUDE]: Haitian Christian
Democratic Party or POCH [Osner FEVRY and Marie-Denise CLAUDE];
Haitian Democratic Party or PADEMH [Clark PARENT]; Haitian Democratic
and Reform Movement or MODEREH [Dany TOUSSAINT and Pierre Soncon
PRINCE]; Heads Together [Dr. Gerard BLOT]; Lavalas Family or FL [leader
NA]: Liberal Party of Haiti or PLH [Michael MADSEN]: Mobilization for
National Development or MON [Hubert DE RONCERAY]; Movement for
National Reconstruction or MRN [Jean Heno)d BUTEAU]; Movement for the
Installation of Democracy in Haiti or MIDH [Marc BAZIN]; National Front for
the Reconstruction of Haiti or FRON [Guy PHILIPPE]; National Progressive
Democratic Party or PNDPH [Turneb DELPE]; New Christian Movement for a
New Haiti or MOCHRENA [Luc MESADIEU]; Open the Gate Party (Parti
Louvri Sayre) or PLB [leader NA]; Popular Party for the Renewal of Haiti, or
Generation 2000 [Claude ROMAIN and Daniel SUPPLICE]; Struggling
People's Organization or OPL [Edgard LEBLANC]; MNP28 [Dejean
BELIZAIRE]; KOMBA [Evans LESCOUFLAIR]
Autonomous Organizations of Haitian Workers or CATH [Fignole ST-CYR];
Confederation of Haitian Workers or CTH; Federation of Workers Trade
Unions or FOS; Group of 184 Civil Society Organization, or G-184 [Andy
APAID]; National Popular Assembly or APN; Papaye Peasants Movement or
MPP [Chavannes JEAN-BAPTISTE]; Popular Organizations Gathering
Power or PROP; Roman Catholic Church; Protestant Federation of Haiti
ACCT, ACP, Caricom (suspended), FAO, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO,
ICCt (signatory), ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Interpol,
IOC, IOM, ITU, LAES, MIGA, OAS, OPANAL, OPCW (signatory), PCA, UN,
UNCTAD, UNDP, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WCO, WFTU, WHO,
WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTO

51

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87
Diplomatic
representation in
the US:

Diplomatic
representation
from the US:

Flag description:

Economy overview:

GDP (purchasing
power parity):
GDP - real
growth rate:
GDP - per capita:
GDP composition by
sector:
Labor force:

Labor force - by
occupation:
Unemployment
rate:
Population below
poverty line:

chief of mission: Charge d'Affaires Raymond JOSEPH (as of November

2004)
chancery: 2311 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 332-4090
FAX: [1] (202) 745-7215
consulate(s) general: Boston, Chicago, Miami, New York, and San Juan
(Puerto Rico)
chief of mission: Ambassador James B. FOLEY
embassy: 5 Harry S Truman Boulevard, Port-au-Prince
mailing address: P. 0. Box 1761, Port-au-Prince
telephone: [509] 222-0354, 222-0269, 222-0200, 222-0327
FAX: [509] 223-1641 or 222-0200 ext 460

two equal horizontal bands of blue (top) and red with a centered white
rectangle bearing the coat of arms, which contains a palm tree flanked by
flags and two cannons above a scroll bearing the motto L'UNION FAIT LA
FORCE (Union Makes Strength)

In this poorest country in the Western Hemisphere, 80% of the population
lives in abject poverty, and natural disasters frequently sweep the nation.
Two-thirds of all Haitians depend on the agriculture sector, which consists
mainly of small-scale subsistence farming. Following legislative elections in
May 2000, fraught with irregularities, international donors - including the US
and EU - suspended almost all aid to Haiti. The economy shrank an
estimated 1.2% in 2001, 0.9% in 2002, grew 0.4% in 2003, and shrank by
3.5% in 2004. Suspended aid and loan disbursements totaled more than
$500 million at the start of 2003. Haiti also suffers from rampant inflation, a
lack of investment, and a severe trade deficit In early 2005 Haiti paid its
arrears to the World Bank, paving the way to reengagement with the Bank.
The resumption of aid flows from all donors is alleviating but not ending the
nation's bitter economic problems. Civil strife in 2004 combined with
extensive damage from flooding in southern Haiti in May 2004 and Tropical
Storm Jeanne in northwestern Haiti in September 2004 further impoverished
Haiti.
$12.05 billion (2004 est.)

-3.5% (2004 est.)

purchasing power parity - $1,500 (2004 est.)
agriculture: 30%
industry: 20%
services: 50% (2001 est.}
3.6 million
note: shortage of skilled labor, unskilled labor abundant (1995)
agriculture 66%, industry 9%, services 25%

widespread unemployment and underemployment; more than two-thirds of
the labor force do not have formal jobs (2002 est.)
80% (2003 est.)

52

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Route 87

Household
income or
consumption by
percentage
share:
Inflation rate
(consumer
prices):
Budget:

lowest 10%: NA
highest 10%: NA

22% (2004 est.)

revenues: $330.2 million
expenditures: $529.6 million, including capital expenditures of NA (2004 est.)

Agriculture products:

Industries:

coffee, mangoes, sugarcane, rice, corn, sorghum, wood

sugar refining, flour milling, textiles, cement, light assembly industries based
on imported parts

Industrial
production
growth rate:
Electricity production:

NA

618 million kWh (2002)

Electricity production by
source:

fossil fuel: 60.3%
hydro: 39. 7%
nuclear: 0%
other: 0% (2001)

Electricity consumption:

574.7 million kWh (2002)

Electricity exports:

0 kWh (2002)

Electricity imports:

0 kWh (2002)

Oil - production:
Oil consumption:

0 bbl/day (2001 est)
11,000 bbl/day (2001 est.)

Oil - exports:

NA

Oil - imports:

NA

Current account
balance:
Exports:
Exports commodities:
Exports partners:
Imports:
Imports commodities:

$-27.63 million (2004 est)

$338.1 million f.o.b. (2004 est.)
manufactures, coffee, oils, cocoa, mangoes

US 81.2%, Dominican Republic 7.3%, Canada 4.1% (2004)

$1.085 billion f.o.b. (2004 est.)
food, manufactured goods, machinery and transport equipment, fuels, raw
materials

53

The Culture of Haitian Medicine: Ronte 87

Importspartners:
Reserves of
foreign exchange
and gold:

US 34.8%, Netherlands Antilles 18%, Malaysia 5.1%, Colombia 4.7% (2004)

$80.64 million (2004 est.)

Debt - external:

$1.2 billion (2004 est.)

Economic aid recipient:

$150 million (FY04 est.)

Currency (code):

Currency code:
Exchange rates:
Fiscal year:

gourde (HTG)

HTG
gourdes per US dollar - 38.352 (2004), 42.367 (2003), 29.251 (2002), 24.429
(2001 ), 21.171 (2000)
1 October - 30 September

Telephones main lines in use:

130,000 (2002)

Telephones mobile cellular:

140,000 (2002)

Telephone
system:

Radio broadcast
stations:
Radios:
Television
broadcast
stations:
Televisions:

general assessment: domestic facilities barely adequate; international
facilities slightly better
domestic: coaxial cable and microwave radio relay trunk service
international: country code - 509; satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic
Ocean)
AM 41, FM 26, shortwave 0 (1999)

415,000 (1997)
2 (plus a cable TV service) (1997)

38,000 (1997)

Internet country
code:

.ht

Internet hosts:

NA

Internet Service
Providers (ISPs):
Internet users:

Highways:

3 (2000)

80,000 (2002)

total: 4,160 km
paved: 1,011 km
unpaved: 3,149 km (1999 est.)

54

The Culture of Haiti au Medicine: Route 87

Ports and
harbors:
Airports:
Airports - with
paved runways:

Airports - with
unpaved
runways:

Military
branches:

Cap-Haitien

13 (2004 est.)
total: 4
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 3 (2004 est.)
total: 9
914 to 1,523 m: 4
under 914 m: 5 (2004 est.)

the regular Haitian Armed Forces (FAdH)- Army, Navy, and Air Force - have
been demobilized but still exist on paper until or unless they are
constitutionally abolished

Military service
age and
obligation:

18 years of age for voluntary recruitment into the police force {2001)

Manpower
available for
military service:

males age 18-49: 1,626,491 (2005 est.)

Manpower fit for
military service:

males age 18-49: 948,320 (2005 est.)

Manpower
reaching military
service age
annually:

males: 98,554 (2005 est.)

Military
expenditures dollar figure:
Military
expenditures percent of GDP:

Disputes international:

Illicit drugs:

$26 million (2003)

0.9% (2003)

since 2004, about 8,000 peacekeepers from the UN Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) maintain civil order in Haiti; despite efforts to control illegal
migration, Haitians fleeing economic privation and civil unrest continue to
cross into Dominican Republic and to sail to neighboring countries; Haiti
claims US-administered Navassa Island
major Caribbean transshipment point for cocaine en route to the US and
Europe; substantial money-laundering activity; Colombian narcotics
traffickers favor Haiti for illicit financial transactions; pervasive corruption

http:// geography .about. com/library/cia/blchai ti.htrn

55

