Anthropology Senior Theses

University of Pennsylvania

ScholarlyCommons
Department of Anthropology

Spring 2007

The Genetic History of the Saraswat Brahmins: Origins and
Affinities With Indian Populations
Athma Anjali Pai
University of Pennsylvania

Follow this and additional works at: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses

Q

Part of the Anthropology Commons

Recommended Citation
Pai, Athma Anjali, "The Genetic History of the Saraswat Brahmins: Origins and Affinities With Indian
Populations" (2007). Anthropology Senior Theses. Paper 84.

This paper is posted at ScholarlyCommons. https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/84
For more information, please contact repository@pobox.upenn.edu.

The Genetic History of the Saraswat Brahmins: Origins and Affinities With Indian
Populations
Disciplines
Anthropology

This thesis or dissertation is available at ScholarlyCommons: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/84

THE GENETIC HISTORY OF THE SARASWAT BRAHMINS:
ORIGINS AND AFFINITIES WITH INDIAN POPULATIONS

By
Athma Anjali Pai
AN UNDERGRADUATE RESEARCH PAPER
In
Anthropology
Submitted to the
Department of Anthropology
University of Pennsylvania

Thesis Advisor: Dr. Theodore G. Schurr
2007

Table of Contents
~

Index of Supplementary Material

2

Abstract

3

I. Background to Research Problem
I. I Brief History of India
I.2 Introduction to Biogenetic Studies in India
I.3 Introduction to Saraswat Bralnnins
I.4 Specific Aims of Study
II. Research Design and Methods
II.1 Sample Collection
II.2 Laboratory Analysis

4
6
10

16

18
21
21

Sample Preparation
Extraction of DNA
Mitochondrial Analysis

22

II.3 Statistical and Phylogenetic Methods

Statistical Analysis
Phylogenetic Analysis
III. Analysis and Interpretation of Data
III.1 Sample Background
III.2 Saraswat Brahmin Population Results

Haplogroup Diversity
Saraswat Brahmin Statistical Analysis
Religious Mutt Differentiation
III.3 Comparisons with other Indian Populations

22
24
24
25

27
29

30
32
35
37

39

Haplogroup Variance
Summary Statistical Analysis
Population Structure
Genetic Distances

41
43
45

IV. Discussion and Conclusions

51

References Cited

72

1

Index of Supplementary Material
ill!@

Tables:
I: Haplogroup Diagnostic Molecular Markers
2: Response to Birth Location on Genealogy Form
3: Distribution of Birth Locations
4: Saraswat Brahmin Statistical Summary
5: Branch-specific Age Estimates
6: Mutt Structure AMOVA Estimates
7: Index of Comparative Populations
8: Summary Statistics for Comparative Populations
9: Indian Population Structure AMOVA Estimates
10: FsT Genetic Distance Matrix for Comparative Populations

23
27
28
32
34
37
38
42
44
47

Figures:
I: The Proposed Migration Route of Saraswat Brahmins
2: Generational Birth Locations of Saraswat Brahmins
3: Saraswat Brahmin Network
4: Percentages ofHaplogroups in Saraswat Brahmins
5: Saraswat Brahmins Pairwise Mismatch Distributions
6: Mutt Distribution Network
7: Distribution of Comparative Populations
8: Variance ofHaplogroups
9: Multidimensional Scaling Plots
10: Graphical Representations of the Neighbor-Joining Phylogenetic Method

55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64

Appendices:
I: Informed Consent Form
II: Genealogical Information
III: Participant Information Sheet

66
68
69

2

Abstract:

The Saraswat Brahmin connnunity of western India is a highly endogamous
group which has retained a distinct ludo-European language and culture through
centuries of migration and displacement from various parts of India, and despite living in
Dravidic dominated South-India for hundreds of years. This study represents the first
analysis of genetic variation in this group using mitochondrial (mt) DNA markers.
Mitochondrial markers were analyzed in 116 Saraswat Brahmin males residing in North
America. Due to the effects from both high endogamy and complex migratory patterns, it
previously was hypothesized that the haplotype frequencies in Saraswat Brahmins would
distinguish them from other Indian language connnunities, although they might exhibit
varying degrees of genetic affinity with geographically related language communities.
The results have shown that the mtDNA haplotypes found in Saraswat Brahmins are
predominantly South Asian-specific haploroups, though there are several unique
variations on commonly found haplotypes. In general, there is some evidence for a
higher maternal affinity with Indo-European North Indian groups. Analysis ofmalespecific Y-chromosorne variation could enrich the data of distinct maternal lineages as
presented in this thesis.

3

I. Background to Research Problem

I. I Brief History of India
The South Asian subcontinent is an area of enormous linguistic, cultural,
religious, historical, and biological diversity. The largest country on the subcontinent,
India, particularly exemplifies this diversity with its 4,693 recognized ethnic communities
and 325 functioning languages with 25 scripts (Singh, 2002). With more than a billion
inhabitants, the country is the second most populated nation in the world. The extensive
variation on all levels seems to have been generated over millennia of migrations, cultural
development, and world interaction all happening in a topographically varied
geographical crossroads for modern human migrations (TIGV, 2005). The initial
inhabitants of India were possibly some of the earliest modern humans that migrated out
of Africa in the Pleistocene (Kivisild et al., 1999a; Kivisild et al., 1999b; Kivisild et al.,
2003). These settlers of the subcontinent are believed to be represented in the indigenous
tribal populations that still inhabit India today. Later, it is known that pockets of
extensive civilizations built up in the northern river regions oflndia with the Harappan
culture around 2800 BCE, but then declined around the arrival oflndo-European
speaking Aryan groups approximately around 1200 BCE (Snell, 1987). These Aryan
nomads are credited by scholars for developing a religious caste hierarchy, spreading
Inda-European language and culture, and pushing the Dravidian civilizations southward
(Snell, 1987), though the details concerning their arrival and impact have long been
debated.

4

Today, India has two dominant linguistic and cultural communities with
anthropological distinctions that probably arose because of events related to the Aryan
arrival (Rajkumar and Kashyap, 2004). Most northern communities are Indo-European
speakers, while South Indians are generally Dravidian speakers. Both linguistic
communities have had significant influences in shaping what is now thought of as general
Indian culture (Basu et al., 2003). Overall, the history of India is one of a continuous
inward flow of people either migrating or invading while leaving their marks on culture
and the gene pool (Basu et al., 2003). There have been multiple communities leaving an
indelible mark on India, including the Han Chinese, Greeks, Scytho-Iranians, Kushans,
Jewish tribes, Zoroastrians, Moghuls, Muslims, Dutch, French, Portuguese, English, etc
(Gaikwad and Kashyap, 2005; Kivisild et al., 2003; Rajkumar and Kashyap, 2004; Snell,
1987).
Several unique characteristics oflndian society need to be taken into account with
any anthropological studies, including this study. Two of the major features are (I) the
distinctions between non-Hindu tribal populations and the rest of Indian society and (2)
the Hindu caste system that has embedded itself thoroughly into historical and
contemporary Indian society. The non-Hindu tribal populations spread throughout India
are thought to be the descendants of the original inhabitants who were barely impacted by
the arrival of the Aryans - other than through geographical displacements either to the
south or into remote forest regions (Metspalu et. al. 2004; Rajkumar et. al. 2005). Tribal
populations make up a little less than 8% of the residents oflndia today (Census, 1991).
They mostly follow ancestral worship, and speak languages in all of the four major
linguistic groups found in India (Cordaux et. al. 2003). Due to their high isolation, they

5

are very interesting to study to elucidate elements of early Indian culture and genetic
ongms.
The second factor, the Hindu caste (or varna) system, is said to have originated
with the arrival of the Aryans into India (Kivisild et. al. 2003; Bamshad et. al. 2001).
Aryans incorporated themselves into the highest caste and the native populations into a
spectrum of castes below their own. The system is made up of 5 predominant categories:
Brahmin (priest), Kshatriya (warrior), Vaishya (trader/businessman), Sudra
(laborer/farmer), and Panchama (the untouchable or absolute menial laborer). This
system is mentioned in several Hindu texts and seen as a fundamental system of order for
society that incorporates both the division of labor and the philosophical principles of
rebirth and the attainment of higher goals (Snell, 1987). Due to strict cultural practices
and high rates of endogamy, these castes seem to represent unique homogeneous
communities that can be studied as particular units within the amalgam of Indian society.

It is important to note, however, the inherent difference between a caste and ajiiti. While
castes can be thought of as a broader social grouping,jiitis are more regional in nature.
Jiitis are particular communities that share a caste, language, culture, ancestral

counection, and oftentimes a common occupation. Therefore, jiitis are the actual units
that can be considered to be homogeneous in nature, and can be considered as separate
populations that might have more genetic similarity than a wider caste sampling.

I.2 Introduction to Biogenetic Studies in India
Anthropological genetic studies are often conducted (like the study in this thesis),
to elucidate elements of historical, cultural, or evolutionary significance. Studies utilize

6

either classical markers (blood groups, etc), or molecular markers (DNA, genes, etc).
The two most commonly used molecular markers are mitochondrial (mt) DNA and the
Y-chromosome, both of which provide varying information about maternal and paternal
histories of populations respectively. An individual's sequence of diagnostic DNA
mutational markers is referred to as a haplotype. Haplotypes are then grouped into larger
clusters called haplogroups (referred to by a letter nomenclature) that encompass lineages
that share a discernable recent common ancestor.
The large diversity of biological variation, languages, religions, and cultural
practices of people on the Indian subcontinent has led to an intensification of genetic
diversity research on Indian communities (Baig et al., 2004; Bamshad et al., 2001).
Remarkably, approximately one fifth of the human gene pool belongs primarily to people
inhabiting the Indian subcontinent (Kivisild et al., 1999a). Early work focused on
estimating the distinctions between groups in the well-known Indian caste systems,
delineating proto-Asian versus West Eurasian origins of peoples, estimating molecular
dates for waves of settlement on the subcontinent, and mapping genetic data onto
language trees (Baig et al., 2004; Bamshad et al., 2001; Kivisild et al., 1999a; Kivisild et
al., 2003; Palanichamy et al., 2004). Many studies investigating the spread of modern
humans out of Africa have used genetic studies in India to demonstrate the rapid dispersal
of humans along the Asian coasts after leaving Africa (Sun et al., 2006). Mitochondrial
and Y-chromosome studies are especially relevant for Indian populations because initial
results have shown that Indian lineages contain some very early branches of common
haplotypes (Kivisild et al., 1999a; Palanichamy et al., 2004).

7

Many molecular genetics studies of populations from the South Asian continent
have attempted to solve the problems ofmacrohaplogroup (M, N, and R) differentiation,
clusters in the continent, patterns of regional variation, and caste differentiation. Due to
the geographical placement of the subcontinent, it is easy to see how Indians are
considered to be concurrently part of both the Eastern and Western Eurasian
"metapopulations" (Kivisild et al., 1999b). Analytical work has demonstrated that about
60% oflndians today have maternal haplotypes belonging to one of the Indian-specific
branches ofhaplogroup M (Bamshad et al., 2001; Kivisild et al., 2003). Such a finding is
by no means surprising, as India has long been considered as an incubator for specific M
haplotypes, leading to hypotheses that many Indian tribal and caste populations derive
from extremely similar genetic heritages due to limited Pleistocene gene flow from
regions outside of South Asia (Kivisild et al., 2003).
The deepest roots of the M lineage are found in India, showing signs that this
macrohaplogroup most probably originated in South Asia (Palanicharny et al., 2004;
Rajkumar et al., 2005; Sun et al., 2006). In addition, the frequency and diversity of the
undifferentiated M haplotypes is found to be the highest in India (Kivisild et al., 2003).
Many of the mutations that determine M lineages in India are rarely found in gene pools
of populations residing in East Asia, Oceania, and Southeast Asia (Sun et al., 2006;
Metspalu et. al. 2004). There are also occurrences oflndian specific U (N haplogroup)
and R haplotypes, along with non-Asian haplogroups most commonly considered to be
from West Eurasia (Bamshad et al., 2001). Three of these haplogroups (M2, U2i, and
R5) are considered to be the oldest Indian lineages, and posited to be associated with the
initial inhabitation of South Asia (Metspalu et al., 2004).

8

A number of studies have also investigated the frequencies of West Eurasian
haplogroups in caste and tribal populations within India (Baig et al., 2004; Bamshad et
al., 2001; Basu et al., 2003; Kivisild et al., 2003). Tribal and caste populations are highly
differentiated based on genetic distance estimates (Basu et al., 2003). Studies have shown
that affinities to European populations due to higher frequencies of West Eurasian
haplogroups is highest in caste groups and proportionately increased by higher caste rank
(Bamshad et al., 2001; Basu et al., 2003). These findings support the idea that the Indian
caste system was introduced by invading Indo-Aryans and later Eurasian admixture
through migrations and invasions (Baig et al., 2004; Bamshad et al., 2001; Basu et al.,
2003; Kivisild et al., 2003). The linguistic similarities of the Indian branch of the IndoEuropean language tree and West European Indo-European languages most probably
reflect contact on just a linguistic level rather than both linguistic and genetic levels at
that early stage (Bamshad et al., 2001). Rather, the Indian lineages commonly thought to
be common West Eurasian specific can probably be ascribed to later admixture which
accounts for less than I 0% of the current Indian gene pool and relatively minor impacts
on the previously existing diversity of India (Kivisild et al., 1999a; Kivisild et al., 2000;
Metspalu et al., 2004).
There are distinct differences in caste affiliation with respect to data from mtDNA
and Y-chromosome markers. The maternal lineages present in Indian groups show a
stronger East Asian similarity. In constrast, paternal lineages point to an increase in
Eurasian haplogroups proportionate to caste rank, an idea supported by results showing
that less than I 0% of mitochondrial DNA in caste populations can be connected to nonIndian specific lineages (Baig et al., 2004; Bamshad et al., 2001; Kivisild et al., 2003).

9

Despite this general pattern, researchers have also noted the regional variation in
haplogroup frequencies across India. There is a wide geographic dispersal of caste
populations, leading to geographically dependent connections between caste and tribal
populations (Barnshad et al., 200 I). While one can argue for geographical or
evolutionary connections between Indian caste and tribe populations, it is hard to ignore
the possibility of West Eurasian admixture through various historical invasions that
occurred throughout India's history (Kivisild et al., 2003).

I.3 Introduction to Saraswat Brahrnins
Saraswat Brahrnins are an Indian sub-caste, or jiiti, distinguished from other
Indian Brahrnin communities by their history, traditions, and language (Bhatia et al.,
1976; Conlon, 1977; Kerri, 1998). The term "Saraswat Brahrnin" is commonly used to
refer to members of the wider caste-cluster known as the Gaud Saraswat Brahrnin (GSB)
cluster, and will be used in this study to refer to all members of this cluster (Conlon,
1977). The religious sub-structure of this caste-cluster will be discussed later. Saraswat
Brahrnins belong to the Gaud (northern) division of the IO predominant Brahrninical
divisions in Hinduism (Conlon, 1977). They have maintained this high Brahmin identity
through historical, though they have had to deal with criticism and distrust from fellow
Brahmin groups because of the inclusion offish in their diet.
The most notable characteristic of Saraswats is their use of Konkani as a native
language. Konkani is a direct derivative of the Sanskrit language and is spoken by
between 5 to 7 million spealcers around the world today (Census, 1991; Kerri, 1998).
Although found sprinkled through Southern India, Konkani is the state language of Goa -

10

the most recent common homeland of the Saraswats. It seems that the membership
criterion for the Saraswat Brahmin community is one that is common through most of
Hindu India- i.e., they rely on a "natural identity," or an ancestral relationship to be
considered part of the community (Conlon, 1977). However, their uniqueness as a
community goes past their common use of Konkani, as their culture and history uncovers
a complex pattern of social and cultural components.
Saraswats have an intricate past which has been explained through both oral
history and scholarly investigations. Unfortunately, the historical documentation of
Saraswat Brahmins in Goa is forever lost due to both natural forces and the Portuguese
invasion (Conlon, 1977). Legend posits that they originated in Kashmir on the banks of
the now dry Saraswati River, which gave its name to the community. The Hindu
Puranas (religious legends built around historical events) tell a story of the Brahmin warleader Parashurama leading the 'Aryans' (Brahmins) of the Saraswati River banks to his
newly created land on the Konkan Coast (Keni, 1998). This legendary outline is not
uncommon, as most dominant Brahmin castes along the western coast of India have
similar origin myth linked to Parashurama (Conlon, 1977).
However, scholarly evidence however, follows a similar pattern of travel from
Kashmir through Punjab, the Sind, Gujurat, Bengal, and Maharashtra before arriving in
Goa, which is now considered the Saraswat homeland (Bhatia et al., 1976; Conlon,
1977). This supposed migratory route is shown by the black line in Figure 1. Their stay
in Bengal on the eastern coast of India has been supported by the early appearance of fish
into the diet of Bengali Brahmins and the parallels between Konkani and Bengali dialects

11

(Conlon, 1977; Keni, 1998). Religiously, Saraswats maintained many similar clan names
and practices that clearly indicate their northern Gaud Brahmin origins (Conlon, 1977).
In Goa, they prospered and established themselves as the principal brahminical
elite employed as land-owners, scribes, accountants, and master traders (Conlon, 1977).
By the late 15 th and early 16th centuries, Saraswats had began to move out of Goa seeking more farmland, trade opportunities, or expanded employment potential (Conlon,
1977; Keni, 1998). When the Muslim Bijapur empire won control over Goa from the
Hindu Vijayanagar dynasty, social order started to deteriorate significantly and fell apart
after the Portuguese conquer of Goa started in 1510 (Conlon, 1977).
The Saraswats were subjected to persecution and forced to make religious
conversions, resulting in many Konkani speaking Muslims and Catholics who can trace
their ancestry back to Goan Saraswat Brahmins. Although Goan Hindus initially fought
for religious freedom, large groups of Saraswats fled Goa to southern Maharashtra in the
north and Karnataka and Kerala in the south to escape persecution. In 1559 CE, King
Joao III demanded the expulsion of non-Christians from Goa, which prompted 12,000
Saraswat families to flee both to the north and south, as shown by the yellow lines in
Figure 1 (Keni, 1998).
As a result, Saraswats can now be found spread across the Konkan (western) coast
oflndia (Bhatia et al., 1976; Conlon, 1977; Keni, 1998; Patil, 1970). However, the
migrations clearly began before the Portuguese decrees and seem to have been instigated
by Saraswat traders traveling as far south as Kerala. Those who moved north into
Maratha-controlled Maharashtra were successful as Brahmin advisors in both politics and
the economy (Conlon, 1977). Those moving south into Karnataka also prospered -

12

finding land to irrigate and employment in many port and trading towns, where they
became known as "Konkanis," a moniker continuing throughout Karnataka even today
(Conlon, 1977). Saraswats traveling even farther south into Kerala had to initially deal
with the hostility of the Portuguese-fearing Muslim Zamorin ofKozikhode (Calicut)
before they continued south to prosper as traders in Kochi (Cochin) (Kerri, 1998).
Despite their geographic spread and relatively seamless into new areas, the
Saraswat Brahmin community has maintained a surprising degree of "community
consciousness" (Patil, 1970). Scholars attribute this to a continuance of the Konkani
language, religious and cultural traditions, and high rates of endogamy (Conlon, 1977;
Kerri, 1998; Patil, 1970). Although the migration out of Goa broke the established
geographically-based society, displaced Saraswats were still united by a remembrance
and longing to go back to Goa (Conlon, 1977). However, divisions did eventually occur
as at present the community is divided into four distinct religious communities (mutts),
although association and intermarriage among members of these communities is
common. The four communities-Kavle Mutt (~740 CE), Kashi Mutt (~1300 CE),
Gokarn Parthagali Mutt (~1476 CE), and Chitrapur Saraswat Mutt (~1708 CE)- most
probably developed out of geographic connections and various concurrent rising
movements in Hinduism (Keni, 1998). Under strict definitions, these four religious
groups would represent distinct Hindu subcastes. However, through their similar
practices and tolerance of sub-caste intermarriage, they all fall under the common Gaud
Saraswat Brahmin caste-cluster, as mentioned earlier.
The northern heritage of Saraswats living in South India is evident in their
language (Konkani is one of the few lndo-European languages found in Dravidic

13

dominated South India), unique cuisine, and religious practices (Kerri, 1998). Due to
high education rates, Saraswats have become prominent within the professional and
business communities in recent years. Their movement out of districts in Karnataka and
Kerala has been a recent phenomenon. Early in the 20 th century, they were widely
distributed in villages along the Konkan coast, with very few living in major cities
(Conlon, 1977). Following independence movement and post-independence trends,
many Saraswats relocated to Mumbai (Bombay) (Conlon, 1977). Like many other
Indians, Saraswat Brahmins have now immigrated outside of India, including numerous
individuals who have settled in the United States and Canada (Kerri, 1998).
Although well studied for their culture and religious practices, there has been very
little genetic work done on the Saraswat Brahmin community. The complex migratory
patterns and high degree of endogamy as a minority high-caste Indian group makes the
community an interesting target for genetic work. The only ascertainable work that has
been done on Saraswats was a classical genetic marker study by Bhatia et al. (1976) in
which ABO and Rhesus blood marker variation was assessed in members of the
community in various Indian cities (Bhatia et al., 1976). Because of the nature of these
marker systems, this study provided limited information about the degree that geographic
separation and endogamy has affected genetic variation in Saraswats. The increased
resolution available through newer molecular methods and a growing knowledge of
genetic ancestry markers will allow a more thorough investigation of the genetic make-up
of this population.
An interesting addendum to the Bhatia et al. (1976) study was their conclusion
that the Saraswats may have been genetically influenced by Greek invasions in Punjab

14

due to notable levels of Cooley's thalassemia found in both Saraswats and Greeks (Bhatia
et al., 1976; Patil, 1970). The possible finding of Greek ancestry among this group would
be quite remarkable. Overall, this research into the population history of Saraswat
Brahmins will certainly contribute to our understanding of the genetic history oflndians
and possibly provide an example to understand the nuances of admixture and migration
on the Indian subcontinent.
The most comparable recent molecular research has been on other Brahmin
populations from the Konkan coast. Gaikwad and Kashyap (2005) looked at mtDNA and
Y-chromosomal variation in four Maharasthrian populations in this region. The
population that they looked at with the closest cultural and migratory history to Saraswats
was the Chitpavan Brahmins. They hypothesized that the continuous trade and cultural
contact between populations on the Konkan coast and non-Indians allowed for extensive
genetic diversity, especially after historical evidence that some invading populations were
incorporated into the caste system (Gaikwad and Kashyap, 2005). The study pointed to
the uniqueness of the Konkan coast as the residence of a wide variety of cultural groups,
such as the Indian Jews, Parsis (Zorastrians), Anglo-Indias, and the ludo-Portuguese
(Gaikwad and Kashyap, 2005). Their results indicated that the Chitpavan Brahmins are
genetically associated with Western-Eurasian genotypes through both non-recombining
uni parental (especially paternal Y-chromosome indications) and bi parental variation, thus
leading to the idea that they are of "Scytho-Iranian" ancestry (Gaikwad and Kashyap,
2005).

15

I.4 Specific Aims of Study
India is a unique region of the world with regard to genetic diversity and
population history studies. Both classical and molecular marker studies have shown that
India has the greatest amont of genetic diversity among comparable regions outside of
Africa, making it the perfect "natural genetic laboratory" (Majumder, 1998; Rajkumar
and Kashyap, 2004; TIGV, 2005). Indian populations present opportunities to conduct a
variety of studies due to their many ascertainable sub-structures, the geographic
importance in the spread of modern humans, and the relatively low genetic diversity
values useful for various disease studies (Kivisild et al., 2000; Rajkumar et al., 2005;
TIGV, 2005). It will also be important to study as many Indian populations as possible
since the genomic unity of these diverse populations allows the ability to test the
generality of specific results (Bamshad et al., 2001; TIGV, 2005). It will be especially
interesting to study the southwest regions oflndia due to extensive past colonization by
European traders, large trade networks, and a diversity oflinguistic and cultural practices
spread over a small geographically isolated region (Gaikwad and Kash yap, 2005;
Rajkumar and Kashyap, 2004; Roy et al., 2003).
This particular study seeks to address many related questions about the history of
Indian genetic diversity by using Saraswat Bralunins as a case example. As a high caste
population with potentially significant degrees of admixture, Saraswat Brahmins
represent a unique group from which there are few genetic data. This study clarified
these elements of genetic population history by (1) examining the hap lo group diversity of
the population, (2) measuring degrees of admixture with related groups, (3) investigating
possible migration routes seen through genetic mixing and (4) comparing results with

16

frequencies among non-Indian populations which might have some relation to the
Saraswats. Ultimately, the Saraswat Brahmin genetic diversity results present a model
for the uniqueness and variation within the larger arena oflndian genetic diversity.

17

II Research Design and Methods

II. I Sample Collection
To elucidate the genetic diversity of the Saraswat Brahmins, I planned to analyze
mtDNA and NRY variation. This study is part of a larger collaboration with Dr. T.D.
Dogra, Department of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology, All Indian Institute of Medical
Sciences, New Delhi, India, who is undertaking a similar analysis of genetic variation in
Saraswat Brahmins there. Under the terms of the collaboration, I will receive and
analyze some of the DNAs obtained by Dr. Dogra and exchange data to facilitate further
statistical and phylogenetic analyses to determine the relative biological relationships of
the different Saraswat populations.
After receiving University of Pennsylvania Institutional Review Board approval
for this proposed study and monetary support from a College Alumni Award for
Undergraduate Research, I prepared for sample collection. Knowing that samples would
be collected during the course of the summer of 2006 and in a variety of ways, I put
together a kit that would simplify the collection process. The kit contained an Informed
Consent form (Appendix I) that all participants were required to sign for use of their
biological samples, a Genealogical form (Appendix II) which asked genealogical
questions about themselves and their families for 2-3 generations, two Omni Swab
applicators with two small cryovials with stabilizing TE buffer to collect two buccal cell
samples from each participant, and an Information sheet (Appendix III) to provide basic
information about the project and instructions on how to donate samples using the
applicators. Through interviews and the genealogical data, I was able not to collect

18

samples from individuals who were closely related on either the maternal or paternal
sides of their families. However, given that the Saraswat Brahmins are part of a highly
endogamous community with documented cases of close familial marriage, extra caution
had to be taken to ensure that individuals were not related over the past 2-3 generations.
As a member of the Saraswat Brahmin community myself, I had easier access to
leaders and organizations of the non-resident Indian (NRI) community settled in the
North America. This community is mostly comprised of families that left India over the
past 50 years and resettled in the United States and Canada. I recruited participants for
this study through my personal contacts within the regional communities. The
recruitment of study participants and the collection of genealogical data and buccal cell
samples from these participants were conducted in two ways. First, I contacted potential
participants through e-mail and telephone. To those who agreed to participate, I mailed a
kit (described above) with information about the project and the means to provide their
sample. The second of these two collection methods involved traveling to Saraswat
gatherings to talk to potential participants and either hand out kits or take samples on site.
The largest of these gatherings happened from July 1-4, 2006, in Hamilton,
Ontario, Canada. Called the North American Konkani Sammelan, this gathering was a
community convention that occurs every two years to bring together Konkani speakers
who have settled throughout North America and other places. In reality, the event is a
four day festival of performances, speeches, workshops, exhibitions, and food. The main
purpose seems to be to unite the NRI Saraswat Brahrnin community and allow members a
chance to enjoy with family and long-time friends in one location.

19

Knowing that this would be an ideal place to recruit large numbers of un-related
participants, I contacted the organizers of this convention. Like other members of the
community, the organizers showed considerable interest in the study since Saraswat
Brahmins - like many other minority communities - are very interested in elucidating
their population history in any way. Many members of the North American community
are doctors, so the organizers of the Sammelan referred me to the head of the
concurrently organized Saraswat Brahmin medical symposium. Following the
assumption that mentioning this study to doctors would obtain scientific validity
throughout the community, the head of the medical symposium, Dr. Mohan Pai, agreed to
talk about and encourage participation in this study during the symposium. Through the
connections of Dr. Pai, my father, and my uncle, I was able to hand out 100 kits to people
recruited at the Sammelan, bringing the total number of kits mailed and handed out
throughout the summer up to 150 kits. At the end, I received a sample from 77% of these
kits handed out, thus resulting in 116 total number of participants.
The process of recruiting participants in person was a very interesting experience.
Many people were extremely curious about either the study design, the use of the
samples, or the particular molecular markers being studied. Others wanted to know more
about the hypotheses of the study, the dissemination of results, or the range of molecular
population history studies being conducted throughout the world. I will never forget
when one elderly gentleman pulled me aside from talking to a group of potential
participants and told me something to the effect of"Young lady, I've seen the growth of
this science business and all the buildup around genes and DNA. But to finally tell us that
we 'Konkanis' are the best community- that's worth reading about!" This comment

20

reflected the generally enthusiastic sentiment expressed by most community membersto
whom I talked. There were a few people who were too afraid of misuse of the samples to
donate to the study. I suspect that my status as a younger female member of the
community who had not yet completed an undergraduate degree did not help to reassure
the cynics, many of whom were primarily concerned with the general ethics of DNA
testing and the possibility of disease susceptibility results.
Overall, the experience was reassuring and exciting. The participants' continued
interest in my work and the ability to explain the process erased any doubts that I might
have had. I left this small field experience of collecting samples with about 40 samples
in hand, promises of many more in the mail, and the ethical reassurance that the
community was behind the project.

II.2 Laboratory Analysis
Sample Preparation
When the samples arrived back at the lab, they were extracted with the procedure
described below and marked with labels that reflected only the population to which they
belong and a numerical indicator. It is imperative to respect the confidentiality of
participant donation and molecular results, therefore the key showing the link between
the participants' personal histories and the sample number is accessible only to myself
and my advisor Dr. Schurr. In addition, any connections between participants' individual
histories and results will never be divulged or published. Results will soon be sent to
each participant, along with a review of the overall conclusions of the study.

21

The samples obtained allowed us to extract DNA and subsequently analyze
variation in the mtDNA and NRY of the Saraswat Brahmin populations. These two
genetic systems differ in their inheritance patterns (maternal vs. paternal), mutation rates
(fast vs. slow), and levels of diversity (high vs. moderate). This thesis reflects the results
of the mtDNA studies, since the Y-chromosome studies are in the process of being
completed.

Extraction of DNA
Once labeled and organized, the buccal samples in cryovials were briefly vortexed
to resuspend the cells in solution. Then the buffer solution with cell material was
transferred to clean 1.5 mL microfuge tubes, whereupon the cells were pelleted through
high speed centrifugation (15 min, 14K rpm). The supernatants were discarded and
extracted with phenol-chloroform (Maniatis et al., 1982). After purification with ethanol
washes, the dry DNA samples were re-hydrated in water to create stock solutions. These
stocks were used to create 1: 10 DNA dilutions which were then used for all further
molecular analyses.

Mitochondrial DNA Analysis
The mtDNA work involved the initial sequencing of a total of 400 nucleotide base
pairs each from hypervariable region I (HVR-I) (nucleotide position 16000-16400) of the
coding region, using the primers and PCR conditions reported in Schurr et al. (1999)
(Schurr et al., 1999). This HVR-I sequencing analysis allowed a fine-grained evaluation
of mutational changes that have occurred within individual mtDNAs while also

22

identifying nucleotide changes which define mtDNA haplogroups. All sequencing
reactions were read on an ABI 3130xl DNA Analyzer in the Laboratory of Molecular
Anthropology, and the resulting sequences were aligned and compared to the
mitochondrial Cambridge Reference Sequence using the Sequencer 3. I software tool
(Gene Codes Corporation).
The sequence of HVR-I single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) defined the
haplotypes for each individual, while subsequent polymerase chain reaction-restriction
fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) analysis confirms the mtDNA haplogroup
identity by looking at mutational changes that are conserved through certain haplogroup
families. This analysis involves the discrimination of conserved base substitutions by
restriction endonucleases, which are enzymes that cut DNA at known 4-6 base pair motif
locations. The fragments produced by the digestion of amplified DNA by restriction
enzymes are then analyzed using an agarose gel electrophoresis method. The PCR-RFLP
analysis includes screening for common South Asian haplotype branches of
undifferentiated M types (M2-M6, M18, M25, etc.), undifferentiated R types (R2, RS,
R6, etc.), and specific N types (U2, U7, W, etc.) (Metspalu et al., 2004; Palanichamy et
al., 2004; Sun et al., 2006). The diagnostic HVR-I and/or PCR-RFLP SNPs that were
used to assign haplogroup placement are listed in Table 1.

Table 1. Haplogroup Diagnostic Molecular Markers
Haoloorouo

HVR-I Motif (+16,000)

Godino Reoion SNP

Restriction Enzvme

M

223
223,274,319

+10389/+10400

Ddel/Alul
"

M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
M25
N

"
"

126,223
223, 311

"

223,231,362
223,304

"
"
"

223

-10389/-10400

129,223

23

"
"
"
"

"
Ddel/Alul

N5
R

111,223,311

R5

304

"

+12705

u

"

"

Mboll
"

+12308

Hinfl

U1

183C, 189,249

"

"

U2

"

"

U2a

51
51, 206C

U2b

51

"
"

U2c

51,234

"
"
"

U7

318T

"

"

J

069, 126

-13704

"

BstNI

II.3 Statistical and Phylogenetic Methods
Statistical Analysis
To determine the placement of the Saraswat Brahmin mtDNA diversity within
other Indian populations, I conducted a statistical analysis of the various aspects of
Saraswat population structure, history, and genetic relationships. A primary component
of this work involved comparing the Saraswat data set with comparable data sets from
other Indian populations found in published literature (Cordaux et al., 2003; Gaikwad and
Kashyap, 2005; Kivisild et al., 1999a; Metspalu et al., 2004; Mountain et al., 1995;
Thangaraj et al., 2003) (See Table 7 for chart of comparison populations used). This was
done by using a number of statistical tools available in the Arlequin 3.0 software package
(Excoffier et al., 2005) to assess Saraswat intra- and inter-population variation. Intragroup genetic distances were analyzed individually for each data set using the unbiased
gene diversity estimate (Nei, 1972). This statistic determines the probability that two
alleles drawn at random from a population will be different from each other (]obiing et
al., 2004). The sequence data were also used to calculate mean pairwise differences (a
simple description of overall diversity in the population which can be represented in a
graphical form) and nucleotide diversity estimates (a measure similar to gene diversity
that is independent of sample size) estimates in Arlequin (Excoffier et al., 2005). I also

24

used Arlequin to calculate the pairwise F ST values, which measure the proportion of total
variance in allele frequency that is seen between subpopulations. To examine the interpopulation diversity, I used the AMOVA method (Excoffier et al., 1992), which estimates
the genetic structure indices of populations using the allelic context of haplotypes and
their frequencies. Both the FsT and AM OVA methods assess the proportion of genetic
variance due to population subdivision. The significance of the distances between
subdivisions was analyzed with non-parametric permutation tests.

Phylogenetic Analysis
For the phylogenetic analysis of this data, I constructed networks using two
methods. With the median-joining network method (Bandelt et al., 1999; Bandelt et al.,
1995), I generated a network of mtDNA haplotypes to better understand the phylogenetic
connections between the haplotypes present in Saraswats. Such networks construct trees
from ancestral nodes while allowing for maximum parsimony in the branching
relationships (Jobling et al., 2004). In addition, a neighbor-joining (N-J) tree (Saitou and
Nei, 1987) was constructed with PHYLIP 3.572c (Felsenstein, 1998) from the FsT genetic
distances estimated from haplotype frequencies and DNA sequence data. The N-J
method is based on the 'minimum evolution' method to create the best tree possible while
attempting to have the shortest sum of branch lengths (Jobling et al., 2004).
To investigate the migration patterns of Saraswat Brahmins from north to south
India, I estimated the age of the genetic lineages using diagnostic polymorphisms for
these lineages that signal their emergence as distinct clusters in the overall phylogeny.
With the median network tree, mtDNA HVR-I data were used to estimate the coalescence

25

times for each haplogroup branch, using the mutation rate of Forster and Ingman that
estimates 1 mutation per 20,180 years (Forster et al., 1996; Ingman et al., 2000). While
this method of estimating coalescence dates from HVR-I data is commonly used, it may
not represent the best method for dating, since it uses the highly variable HVR control
region, which contains variable amounts of mutational hotspots and conserved regions.
In addition, the coalescence times for these branches can only indicate the date of
emergence of this branch in the particular population being analyzed, not the age of the
entire haplogroup.

26

III Analysis and Interpretation of the Data

III. I Sample Background
To understand exactly where these individual samples came from and the
demographic history for the group of participants, I asked all participants to fill out a
genealogical form (Appendix II) which asked for information about their birthplace, their
ethnicity, their parents' names and ethnicities and their grandparents' names and
ethnicities. In addition, it asked for the respective religious community affiliation (mutt
affiliation) of their mother's and father's families. The purpose of this information was
two-fold. Firstly, it was a method to ensure that none of the participants were directly
related (brothers or first cousins). Secondly, this information allowed me to test some
ideas that I hypothesized about the community demography through several generations,
namely that (1) the trend towards urban areas is a recent phenomenon, and (2) the mutt
distinctions and affiliations did not form a barrier to genetic admixture between the
communities. I will touch on the first hypothesis in this section, and consider the genetic
evidence for the second hypothesis a little bit later. Unfortunately, this demographic data
are slightly incomplete. Many participants told me that they either could not remember
or did not know their parents' birthplaces or grandparents' names and/or birthplaces.

Table 2 shows the statistics of the responses that I received on these genealogical forms.

Table 2: Respons e to Birth Location on Genealo!!V Form
Exnected
Participants' birth
locations
Parents' birth
locations
Grandparents' birth
locations

27

Actual

Yield

116

96

83%

232

174

75%

464

196

42%

As seen in Table 2, the participants' knowledge of their family's birth locations
decreased with each preceding generation. All of the data analysis that considered these
birth locations took into account the discrepancies in the numbers of reported locations
for each group, and therefore, compared the percentages rather than the actual numbers.
Using these data, I located each birthplace on a map and categorized it as either a
village, town(> 35,000 inhabitants), or a city(> 1 million inhabitants), as defined by the
guidelines of the Indian 2001 Census (Census, 1991). Figure 2 shows a map with the
distribution of the birth locations for three generations of Saraswat Brahmins across the
South India. It is important to note that the birthplaces were distributed predominantly
down the southwest coast oflndia, with very few falling outside of that region.
Interestingly, the few that are out of that region tend to be in urban areas and found in
either the participant or parental generation - in Mumbai to the north, Bangalore in the
center of the map, Chennai on the eastern coast, and the few international locations.
These findings correlate with the fact that the trend towards urban areas seems to be a
more recent phenomenon, as seen in Table 3 below.

Table 3: Distribution of Birth Locations
Village

City

Town

Participants

20%

29%

51%

Pa.rents of Participants

45%

30%

25%

30%

23.50%

Grandparents of Participants

.

4650%
...

These results show that almost 25% of Saraswats seemed to have migrated towards the
city in the last generation. Therefore, the current image of Saraswats as being citydwelling successful businessmen is probably a recent creation, rather than an image
perpetuated for generations. Additionally, ifl were to correlate genetic data with

28

participant birth location, the resulting distribution would not be indicative of the initial
spread ofSaraswats out of Goa. Finally, all of the participants now live in North
America, meaning a correlation to their current residence location would be even more
uninformative.

IIl.2 Saraswat Brahmin Population Results
Of the 116 samples received from participants, 110 were successfully extracted
and amplified to provide sufficient data sets with both HVR-I and PCR-RFLP analyses.
The samples were divided into 43 different haplotypes, which were then placed into
various haplogroups in the M, N and R macrohaplogroup families. The distribution of
haplotypes is shown in Figure 3. The yellow circles at the middle or ends of each branch
indicate a particular haplotype, and the numbers along the branches are mitochondrial
mutational changes found in each haplotype. By haplotype numbers alone, these results
indicate low maternal diversity, with a perpetuation of similar haplotypes and
haplogroups through the community. Comparisons with other India populations (see
Table 7) indicate that these particular haplotypes occur with the highest frequencies in

northern Indo-European speaking populations, supporting historical and linguistic data
showing Saraswat Brahmin origins in North India. The most important thing to note
about this particular phylogenetic network is the very long branches connecting
haplotypes with very diverse SNPs. These long branches could indicate the presence of
old haplotypes which have undergone little recent diversification (Schurr and Wallace,
2002), and would support theories of Saraswat Brahmin cultural isolation by showing

29

evidence that they have been carrying the same haplotypes for generations with little
outside maternal genetic influence.
There are a few particular haplotypes and haplogroup clusters that deserve notice
on this network. First, the diversity of M (both subhaplogroup and undifferentiated)
types is extremely large, as is common with Indian populations (Kivisild et al., 2003;
Metspalu et al., 2004). There are many common Indian M subgroups represented within
Saraswats, as well as several undifferentiated types that could not be associated to any
other population found in published data sets. Second, the haplogroup J branch is quite
unique. Haplogroup J is a common West Eurasian lineage that typically has much
shorter sequence motifs than the six mutational changes in the HVR-I sequences seen in
these J samples. Phylogeographically, this case is also interesting because the only other
Indian populations with similar (but not exact) J haplotypes are the Kashmiri caste
population and the Gujurati caste population - both living along the hypothesized
migration route of Saraswat Brahmins. Another intriguing haplotype is an
undifferentiated U haplotype with HVR-I mutations 16172 and 16311. There is a
possibility that this haplotype could fall into the U6 haplogroup, which is predominantly
found in Northern Africa (Maca-Meyer et al., 2003). The samples within these J and
putative U6 haplotypes will be further analyzed to determine what can be elucidated from
extended mitochondrial sequencing and coding region analysis.

Haplogroup Diversity

Haplogroup diversity is used to ascertain the extent of sequence variability of
mtDNAs in a population. Figure 4a shows the overall diversity in Saraswats as
represented by the three main macrohaplogroup clusters: M, N, and R. As expected for

30

Indian populations, these percentages show a predominance of M types and lesser
frequencies of generally West Eurasian R types and N types. The percentage ofM types
found in Saraswats is about 71 %, which is slightly higher than the estimated national
average of about 60% (Kivisild et al., 2003), and actually much closer to the expected M
percentage in tribal populations (Metspalu et al., 2004). Haplogroup M encompasses 78
Saraswat Brahmin samples, which are further examined in Figure 4b. This figure shows
the percentages of various M subhaplogroups in the Saraswat sample set. As seen here,
undifferentiated M haplotypes comprise the largest group of this pie, represented as 41 %
of the samples. This is expected since India is known to have the largest number of
undifferentiated M lineages (Kivisild et al., 2003). The high percentage (27%) of M4
types wa unusual, since M4 - though an autochthonous type - is thought to be one of the
youngest lineages introduced to India (Metspalu et al., 2004). These haplotypes will
require additional SNP typing to ascertain a more complete categorization of these
samples as part of the M4 haplogroup.

Figure 4a shows that about 23% of the samples belonged to macrohaplogroup R.
Most of these types are Indian specific haplotypes. The J haplotypes discussed above
belong to this macrohaplogroup as well. The major R lineage that appears in Saraswat
Brahmin samples was haplogroup U. Thirteen out of the 25 R samples belonged to
haplogroup U in various subhaplogroups as shown in Figure 4c. U2, a haplogroup found
throughout South Asian and very rarely elsewhere, was the predominant subhaplotype in
the Saraswat samples.

31

Saraswat Brahmin Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis of the Saraswat Brahmin haplotypes was performed using the
software program Arlequin 2.0 to yield the population specific results found in Table 4.

Table 4: Saraswat Brahmin Statistical Summary
Gene diversity
0.958*
Tajima's D
-1.797*
Fu's F
-25.081*
*statistically significant (< 0.05)
Nei's gene diversity test is a measure of the probability of obtaining two different alleles
from a population when selecting alleles at random (Job ling et al., 2004; Nei, 1972).
Ranging from 0 to 1, higher gene diversity estimates indicate an increased frequency of
mutational changes and therefore different haplotypes. The Saraswat Brahmin gene
diversity estimate of 95.8% falls within a standard range for human populations, and will
be later compared to the gene diversities of other Indian populations later. Tajima's Dis
a test comparing the statistical parameters accounting for the number of segregating sites
(differentiating mutational sites) and nucleotide diversity to estimate the genetic
neutrality of the population. Positive values indicate a population subdivision or
balancing selection, while negative values indicate population growth or positive
selection (Jobling et al., 2004). The negative Tajima's D value found in Saraswat
Brahrnin populations most probably indicates a population expansion, indicating that the
Saraswats split off from some larger group rather than the other way around. Fu's Fis an
additional neutrality test that analyzes the haplotype frequency distribution and usually
falls near the value of -25 .00.
Another common statistical method used to look at population expansion and
neutrality is the analysis of pairwise mismatch distributions. This distributional

32

histogram approximates the diversity present within a sample set by looking at the
number of distinct differences between all pairs of alleles/haplotypes in a population
(Jobling et al., 2004). The curve of the distribution is often used as a sign of population
history, with smooth, bell-shaped curves indicating a rapid population expansion from a
solitary haplotype, and ragged, multi-peaked curves indicating a population with either
no great expansions or a population bottleneck. (Jobling et al., 2004).

Figure Sa shows the overall pairwise mistmatch distribution for the Saraswat
Brahmins. This figure shows a definite bell-shaped curve with an ostensibly smooth fit
line. The smoothness or raggedness of the distribution is measured by Harpending's
raggedness index, which is essentially a statistical measure comparing neighboring peaks
in a distribution (Jobling et al., 2004). Values less than 0.03 indicate a smooth
distribution - and, therefore, a previous population expansion. The age of this expansion
is usually measured by the mean of the pairwise differences, with a larger number
indicating an older expansion based on sequence diversity.
In order to tease out the details of macrohaplogroup expansions in the Saraswat
population, I performed the same mismatch analysis sequentially on just the M and then
R haplotypes in the data set (N samples were excluded since there are only seven of
them). The mismatch distributions for M and Rare shown in Figures Sb aud Sc
respectively. As expected, due to the large predominance ofM types in the data set, most
of the overall mismatch curve and all of the later (left) part of the curve came from the
individual M distribution, which is very smooth. However, the ragged R mismatch
distribution indicates a much more ragged shape, with an older possible expansion time,
although it must be noted that the lower number of R samples presents a confounding

33

factor when comparing this distribution to the M distribution. Based on these curves and
the mean pairwise differences, this evidence points to the possibility that the M types are
somewhat younger than the R types in the Saraswat Brahrnin set.
One way to test the haplogroup age estimates is by using the p dating statistic
(Morral et al., 1994). This method uses a previously constructed phylogeny or network
to examine intra-allelic diversity by analyzing the average number of mutational changes
between the specified ancestral node and the descendant nodes (Jobling et al., 2004). The
estimate is then multiplied by a default mitochondrial HVR-I mutational rate of 1
mutation per 20,180 years to produce an estimated age of coalescence for all of the
specified nodes in the branch (Forster et al., 1996; Ingman et al., 2000). Likewise, the
statistic, or standard deviation of the p calculation, gives the range of error for this
coalescence date (Saillard et al., 2000). These calculations were carried out with the
Network program using the Bandelt median-joining network as shown in Figure 3.

Table 5 shows the estimated ranges of divergence for the major branches found in the
Saraswat Brahrnin data set.

Table 5: Branch-specific Age Estimates
M

M2
M3
M4
M5
M25
N
R

R5

u
U1
U2
U7
J

p

r

Age



3.04
1.41
0.33
3.10
1.08
0.16
4.71
7.64
6.33
5.00
6.00
4.75
2.00
6.00

0.85
0.48
0.29
1.51
0.46
0.12
1.65
1.75
208
1.39
2.45
1.44
1.41
2.24

61,316
28,435
6,726
62,461
21,732
3,186
95,134
154,175
127,806
100,900
121,080
95,855
40,360
121,080

17,171
9,750
5,945
30,735
9,183
2,374
33,246
35,360
42,008
28,070
49,430
28,981
28,538
45,123

34

a

The estimates in Table 5 support the previous conclusion that the Rand N branches in
this data set possibly diverged earlier than the M types. Especially interesting among
these dating estimates are those for the M4 and J lineages, which are much older than
expected from previous calculations with other data sets (Metspalu et al., 2004).
However, there are some caveats with these age estimates. Firstly, these calculations
only take HVR-I data into account, which is problematic due to the exclusion of
prominent diagnostic PCR-RFLP markers found in the coding region, which is known to
mutate at slower rates than the control region HVR-I. Based on the phylogenetic network
data, the coalescence calculations also take into account ubiquitous HVR-I mutations that
occur in different mtDNA backgrounds (recurrent). Additionally, as shown above,
standard deviation ranges for each of these age estimates are extremely broad, and
frequently overlap. More accurate age estimates might obtained by acquiring more SNP
changes on a whole mt genome scale and use additional dating methods that !alee both
non-coding and coding region mutational rates into account.

Religious Mutt Differentiation
As mentioned earlier, one of the primary reasons that I asked participants for their
religious community or mutt affiliation was to compare the genetic differences between
each of the four mutts. I asked for both their mother's and father's affiliation, and, in
many cases, received information that they were of a mixed marriage between two
different mutts. While recruiting participants for the study, I tried to acquire an equal
number of samples per mutt. Out of the 110 samples analyzed, 74 (67%) belonged to
Kashi Mutt, which is the largest one (Conlon, 1977). The Chitrapur Saraswat Mutt had

35

18 samples; Gokarn Partagali Mutt had 16 samples; and Kavle Mutt had 2 samples. This
largely skewed sample distribution means that all results of mutt comparisons need to be
taken with a grain of salt. If this study is to be expanded in the future, then I would be
sure to design a sampling strategy that aims to even the sample ratios.
To examine the maternal genetic differentiation between mutts, I divided each
haplotype by the number of samples that it contained from each mutt. Figure 6 shows
the spread of the four mutts across the Saraswat Brahmin haplotype network. Yellow
indicates Kashi Mutt; red indicates Chitrapur Saraswat Mutt; blue indicates Gokarn
Parthagali Mutt; and green indicates Kavle Mutt. The wide spread of colors on this
network indicates low phylogenetic differentiation between the religious communities.
Some haplotypes do seem limited to particular mutts, although the same branch usually
contains samples from other mutts.
To further investigate the possibility of these mutts underlying a genetic structure,
I conducted an Analysis of Molecular Variance (AMOVA), which examines the allelic
molecular relationships between varied tiers of population structures (Jobling et al.,
2004). To conduct this analysis, it is necessary to group the populations into a
hierarchical structure. I chose Tier I as Kavle Mutt, Kashi Mutt, and Gokarn Partagali

Mutt - the three older communities. I placed the Chitrapur Saraswat Mutt samples into a
separate tier, since they split off later due to religious philosophical differences and desire
to maintain a separate cultural distinction, although they still frequently intermingle and
intermarry with the greater Gaud Saraswat Brahmin caste-cluster (Keni, 1998). Table 6
shows the results of this AMOV A analysis.

36

Table 6: Mutt Structure AMOVA estimates
among populations

1.01%.

among populations

0.61%.

within group
98.38%.

within populations

not significant (> 0.05)

As expected the from close cultural and marital ties between the four populations, the
AMOV A analysis indicated close genetic ties as well. Only a total of 1.52% of the
genetic variation could be attributed to any differences between the four populations,
with the remaining 98.38% of variation coming from within the sample sets themselves.
These results indicate that, based on my unequal sampling of the four mutt communities,
they are genetically very similar, and, therefore, can be grouped together as one
population for the remaining analysis.

III.3 Saraswats in a broader context: Comparisons with other Indian Populations
To obtain a better understanding of the broader spectrum oflndian diversity, I
compared the Saraswat Brahmin mtDNA data with those of other Indian populations. In
this analysis, I chose 23 other populations - 17 caste populations and 6 tribal groups.
Their names, states of residence, language group, sample size, and reference study are
shown in Table 7. In addition, Table 7 shows the three letter code by which each
individual population will be referenced in all of the proceeding figures and tables. I
tried to pick a range of populations that were from areas through which the Saraswat
Brahmins passed on their migration to Goa. The populations from Karnataka, Kerala,
and Tamil Nadu are the South Indian Dravidic speakers. Two non-Hindu populations
were also incorporated into the caste hierarchy - the Cochin Jews and the Maharashtrian
Zoroastrian Parsis. It is important to note that since there seemed to be a lack of
37

Table 7: Index of Comparative Populations

<.,;
00

Pcpulation Name

CCJde

State

Grouping

Sample Size

Reference

Saras1f.!at B"ahmins

SB

3o a.1<3rn ata .s:a/Kera la/tvla h arash tra

C3ste - Brarm n

11J

this st.Jdy

Dengali Orahmins

WJO

west Dengal

Cc:1Ste - Drarm n

40

Me:spalu et. el. 2C04

Bengali Sudnis

W3S

West Bengal

Caste - Sudra

11

Me:spalu et 21. 2C04

Gujuci_i C2!:::;le

3GU

Gujurc1l

Cc:1:;le

58

\11el:::21lu el. cil. 2004/Kivi~ild el 211. 1999

Kashmiri Caste

l{Kft

Kashmir

Caste

IQ

f-avik Brahnins

KBI-

Karrataka

C:1ste - Brarm n

47

MoJntain et al. '1995

:::ochin Caste-

KCO

Kerala

Caste-

55

Me:spalu et I. 2COJ.

Cochin Jel'\ts

KCJ

KErala

Ca;te - Non Hindu

45

Me:spalu et el. 2C04

Chi:pav:ir Ernhnins

SICB

M0ht1rmhtrn

C:.1ste - Brnl-m n

19

Cikwad and I.;:::ishy0p 2005

DEsasth 3rahmin;

'1D8

Mahara;htra

C3ste - Brarm n

19

Geikwad and K::1sh~ap 2005

Dhang::1rs

'1D1 I

Mahara3htra

Caste - 2udra

18

Geik'Nad and f\::ish);ap 2005

Ko1kanastha Brahmins

Ml,8

Maharmhtra

C3ste - Brarm n

58

Me:spalu et el. 2C04

'v1c1ri:1U121::;

MMA

M21l121r21;;t1lri:1

C21::;le - rvi UJI e

18

G2.ikNi:1l1 2mcJ K':1st1y2Jp 2005

Pars is

MPA

Mahara;htra

Ca;te- - Non Hindu

55

Me:spalu et .sl. 2C04

f-'unJabI brahmIns

f'~f'

PunJab

C:1ste - bralm n

2,

Me:spalu et el. LCU4

PunjGbi I-<shGtriyGG

Pl<F

Punjab

l-<shotriy11

34

Mo:spolu ol cl 2C04

Rajputs

RKR

~ajast1an

Caste - ~:shatriya

36

Me:spalu et. 21 2C04

T:imil Cc1ste

TNA

Tamil Nadu

Caste

51

CordcJLX st. til. 200~

Great An damane::: e

A.GA

And::rrnan

-n::ie

20

Thangaraj et al. 2003

Onoe

AON

AnrlcimRn

-

n'.1F.

R'}

Thmom;:,j Al Al ?00:)

KKM

Kc1rr 2Jl2Jk21

-

fl:JE;;

44

Cor d':1LX ::,L_ d 2 005

K::ir:agas

!<KC

KHala

rr::ie

_.:;~

Cord3L)(_ ~t. al 200j

Kurucna1

KKL

Karrataka

YornvG

l<YE

Kcml3

KUIUlflWI

Mullu

CoGto

-

rlJE:

- n::ic

4,
5,

Kiisild

Et. al. 19Q9

Cord:1Lx 9t al. 2uu::,
Cord::iuc ~t. GI 2002,

published data on South Indian caste populations, I included more Dravidic tribal groups.
The Andamanese were included as geographic outliers, since they are isolated tribal
populations living on the Indian-controlled Andaman Islands. The sample size variation
through this group of comparison populations was also quite large. While there are 999
total samples represented overall, they are not evenly distributed through the populations.
Figure 7 indicates the geographic distribution of these comparison populations
distributed by political state boundaries. Each pie chart is proportional in size to the
number of samples analyzed from that particular state. Pie charts outlined in black
indicate caste populations, while those outlined in red indicate tribal populations. Each
individual pie chart indicates the percentages of the three macrohaplogroups (M, N, and
R) that are found in the state's populations. These relationships will be examined indepth in the next section.

Haplogroup Variance

The distribution of mitochondrial haplogroup variation over wide regions has
been of primary interest to researchers studying the migrations and population histories of
different communities. The Indian haplogroup distribution is especially intriguing due to
the large amount of inherent diversity in culture, religion, and phenotypic characteristics.
Figure 8a shows the percentages of macrohaplogroups across all the comparative
populations, which are arranged in a north to south orientation from left to right. The six
tribal populations to the extreme right are separated from the caste populations by their
noticeably lower haplogroup diversity. The caste and tribal populations can be clearly
differentiated by the lack of macrohaplogroup N mtDNAs in tribal populations and the

39

rather high percentages of M haplotypes. Although not particularly significant, it seems
as though there is a north to south trend in increasing frequencies of M mtDNAs, perhaps
pointing to the ancestral Indian migrations of these M haplogroups through South India
before Indo-Aryan groups arrived in North India. Interestingly, the Saraswat Brahmins
have a similar M frequency to that of the Rajasthani Rajputs (RKR) and the Konkanastha
Brahmins (MKB) from the western coast oflndia.
Figure 8b shows the distribution of varying M subhaplogroups, again arranged
from north to south, with the tribal groups being separated on the extreme right. This
figure shows the same trend of greater diversity in caste populations as compared to tribal
populations. The large percentages of undifferentiated M haplotypes is astounding, and
is the primary evidence used by other scholars to point to the ancestral origins of many
basal M types on the Indian subcontinent (Bamshad et al., 2001; Kivisild et al., 1999a;
Metspalu et al., 2004). Also prominent is the distribution ofM2 (an ancestral Indian
subhaplogroup believed to have arrived with the original inhabitants of subcontinent)
with these populations (Metspalu et al., 2004). The high occurrence of this
subhaplogroup is in the tribal populations. Its frequency decreases through the southern
caste populations, and it is nearly absent in the extreme northern populations (Kashmiris,
Punjabis, Rajasthanis, and Bengalis). Both Saraswat Brahmins (SB) and the
Konkanastha Brahmins (MKB) have low percentages of this subhaplogroup (6.4% and
2.5% ), possibly indicating a low degree of early tribal or Dravidic admixture.
The second most prominent haplogroup was U from the macrohaplogroup R
family. U haplotypes are generally considered to be West Eurasian rather than East
Eurasian in origin, but both U2 and U7 have a significant presence in India and are

40

thought of as Indian-specific types (Palanichamy et al., 2004). Figure 8c shows the
percentages ofU subhaplogroups in the comparative populations, being arranged north to
south from left to right with the tribal populations at the extreme right. As seen before,
there is a difference between most of the tribal groups and the caste populations. Half of
the six tribal groups lacked any U types at all (including the two Andamanese
populations), while a third had primarily Ul haplotypes rather than the more common U2
haplotype seen in all of the caste populations. The Saraswat Brahmins also had 3 U
haplotypes that are undefined (as mentioned earlier, they could be U6 types), and need to
be further analyzed to place them into a subhaplogroup.
Overall, the haplogroup diversity in all the comparative populations indicated a
strong caste versus tribal distinction. Many of the very common Indian-specific
haplotypes such as M2-M6, Ul, U2, and U7 were found distributed through all
geographic areas, supporting hypotheses that they are basal Indian branches (Metspalu et
al., 2004). However, there are two important caveats to note about this data. First, the
sample sizes for these populations are not equal, and therefore might bias the assessment
of diversity. Secondly, one must not to base all estimate of genetic relationships on the
comparative haplogroup variation through populations, as these correlations can often be
insufficient to determine actual diversity at the individual level (Kivisild et al., 1999b).

Summary Statistical Analysis
With the data available, the easiest method to overcome the insufficiency of
haplogroup comparisons between populations is to utilize statistical tools that will
compare relative gene diversity, neutrality estimates, molecular variance, population
structures, and genetic distances. Using the Arlequin 3.0 program, it was possible to

41

Table 8: Summary Statistics for Comparative Populations

CASTE
POPULATIONS

PBP

PKP

RKR

WBB

WBS

GGU

MPA

MCB

MKB

MOO

MDH

MMA

SB

KBH

TNA

KCO

KCJ

0.998
6.155

0.953

0.991

0.991

1).989

0.991

1.000

0 995

0.953

C.988

0.935

1.000

1.000

0.994

0.958

C 984

0987

0.878

mean pairwise differences

5.139

5,705

5.360

5.060

6.227

5.745

6.220

4.506

e.837

6.025

6.316

6.339

7,129

5.572

C.552

6.493

3.721

Harpendings ragg0dness

0.037

0.013

O.Q28

0.017

0.011

0.001

0.011

0.017

C.024

0.010

0.017

0.030

0.008

0.007

C.012

0,015

0 158

0.011

Tajlma's D

-U:58

-1.825

-1.522

-1.978

-1.822

-1.072

-1.936

1.847

-1.459

-2J51

-1.550

-1.908

-1.808

-1.797

-1.517

-1550

-0.605

-1.900

Fu's Fs

-5.257

-17.2i8

-24.705

-25.322

-25 214

-6.366

-25.218

-17.208

-9.032

-25 260

-1540

-15.407

-11 062

-25 081

-23 911

-25.158

-2.383

-25.237

TRIBE POPULATIONS

AGA

AOC

KYE

KKO

KKM

Kr':U

gene div.irsty

0.447

0.713

0.775

0.746

0.621

0.787

NOTE: red indicates significace (< 0.05)

mean pairwise dif!e-rences

2.153

2.545

2.542

:',.003

1.783

5.200

NOTE: mean pairwise differences have no valid significance estimate

Harp endings rsggedne-,s

0.337

0.101

0.079

1).238

0.101

0.099

Tajirra's D

-1.C84

2.422

.Q.231

0.688

0.766

-0,776

Fu's F

-O.C63

4.906

-2.120

1.979

-C231

1.110

gene diversty

t!3

KKA

analyze all of the 23 comparative populations and the Saraswat Brahmins obtain a better
understanding of overall diversity through India (Schneider et al., 2000).

Table 8 presents the summary statistics for all of the 24 populations analyzed,
with gene diversity, mean pairwise differences, raggedness indices, Tajima's D and Fu's
F neutrality values. While comparing values in this table, it is important to note that the
WBS, KKA, MCB, MDB, MDH, and MMA represent data sets with less than 20 samples
each. This certainly affected the statistical values for many of the indices, as the
haplotypic variation was not sufficient to be indicative of the whole population. The
gene diversity values again presented an interesting picture of low diversity within tribal
populations when compared to caste populations. Also interesting were the few positive
Tajima' s D indices. Although only the MP A value was significant, these positive
Tajima' s D trends indicate some degree of population subdivision, or evidence of
genetically significant divisions in the population for which these values were obtained.

Population Structure
While looking at the overall diversity of Indian populations as a whole can be
very informative and intriguing, it is also necessary to explore various elements of substructure that might exist to detect patterns within the fabric of the genetic quilt evident
throughout India. Table 9 shows the results of three different AMOVA calculations that
examined diversity based on varying elements that might subdivide the Indian
population: (1) geographical boundaries, (2) tribal vs. caste elements, and (3) linguistic
affiliation( s).

43

Table 9: Indian Popnlation Structure AMOVA Estimates

amen o u lations
among populations within

Geo raphic
4.30%

Tribal
2.38%*

Lin uistic
5.10%

9.51%
86.19%

10.84%
86.78%

8.64%
86.26%
* not significant(> 0.05)

The first analysis involved a simple geographic division in which populations
were separated into northern or southern residences throughout India. Group I (North
India) included the Kashmiri, Punjabi, Rajasthani, Bengali, Gujurati, and Maharashtrian
populations, Group II (South India) included the Karnataka, Kerala, and Tamil
populations with the Saraswat Brahrnins, and Group III (islands) comprised of the 2
Andamanese populations. The AMOVA analysis indicates that 4.3% of the variation was
due to differences between these geographic groups, while 9 .51 % of the variation can be
explained by differences between populations within the groups.
The second analysis examined tribal versus caste distinctions within the
comparison populations. Since this is based on an aspect of religious subdivision in
Indian society, I placed populations into three groups. Group I (Hindu caste populations)
included the Bengali, Gujurati, Kashmiri, Punjabi, Rajasthani, Tamil, Maharashtrian
caste, Kerala caste, and Karnataka caste populations with the Saraswat Brahrnins, Group
II (tribal populations) included the Andamanesc, Karnataka tribal, and Kerala tribal
populations, and Group III (non-Hindu upper-class populations) included the Cochin
Jews and the Parsis. The historical and legendary origins of both the Cochin Jews and
Parsis are thought to be based in the Middle East and Persia, respectively, although both
were thriving successful communities in India at one time. The AMOVA analysis

44

indicates that only 2.38% of variation resulting from separations between the three
groups, while 10.84% of variation was due to population differences within the groups.
The last AMOVA analysis involved the linguistic separations determined by the
major language families found in India. Group I (Indo-European speakers) included the
Kashmiri, Punjabi, Rajasthani, Bengali, Gujurati, and Maharashtrian populations with the
Saraswat Brahmins, Group II (caste Dravidic speakers) included the Kamataka, Kerala,
and Tamil caste populations (including the Cochin Jews), Group III (tribal proto-Dravidic
speakers) included the Karnataka and Kerala tribal populations, and Group IV
(Andamanese speakers) included the two Andamanese populations. The AMOV A
analysis showed that 5.10% of the variation was explained by linguistic differences,
while 8.64% of the variation was due to differences between the populations within the
group.
The common trend in these three AMOVA analyses was that 86-87% of the
genetic variation of this full data set can be explained by diversity within distinct
populations, while about 13-14% can be explained by geographic, cultural, or linguistic
substructure inherent in the gene pool. Overall, these findings indicate population
structure must be talcen into account when looking at Indian genetic diversity.

Genetic Distances
The Arlequin 3 .0 program also has algorithms that directly measure genetic
distances between populations. One set of values, called Fsrs, describe the variation
between subdivisions of a total data set. Thus, in this case, the total data set would be the
999 individual results with the subdivisions being their ethnic community affiliations.

45

This method examines the variation in individual mutational positions between each
subdivision sequentially. Large FsT values indicate high amounts of continued admixture
between the two populations, while small F ST values indicate highly distinct populations
(Jobling et al., 2004). Table 10 shows the FsT matrix for all comparative populations
used for this study. As seen, the tribal populations have significantly large FsT values
when compared to other populations, again indicating their noticeable separation from
caste groups throughout India.
This matrix of FST values was used to generate graphical representations of the
genetic distances between populations. The first such representation is a
Multidimensional Scaling (MDS) plot of the F ST values between all of the populations, as
seen in Figure 9a. MDS plots use a multivariate analysis to reduce a data set with
greater than three dimensions down to a comprehensible two- or three-dimensional plot,
thereby minimizing the possibilities of information loss (Jobling et al., 2004). In Figure
9a, all of the caste populations were clustered together in the middle of the plot, with red

squares indicating their placement, while the tribal populations widely surrounded this
cluster, with blue squares indicating their placement. In addition, geography seems have
played a factor in the genetic distances between tribal populations, with the Andaman
Islands populations clustering together in the upper right quadrant, the Karnataka tribe
populations together in the lower right quadrant, and the Kerala tribe populations together
in the lower left quadrant.
To get a better estimate of the placement of Saraswat Brahrnins based on genetic
distance, I increased the resolution on the middle caste cluster by removing the

46

Table 9: FsT Genetic Distance Matrix for Comparative Populations
SB

~

--..l

AGA

AON

WBB

was

GGU

KKA

KBH

KKM

KKO

KKU

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+



+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

AGA

0.082

0.000

+

+

+

+

t

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

0.000

+

+

+

0.'150

0.288

0.000

+

+

was

0.062

0 247

0 392

0 048

0.000

+

GGU

0.041

0 146

0.286

0.015

KKA

0.068

0.239

0.387

KBH

0.032

0.143

0 286

KKM

0 191

0.443

0.414

KKO

0-240

0.435

0.521

KKU

0 157

0 2S8

0 081

0,300

KYE

MKB

+

+

0.304

MOH

t

+

0.046

MOB

+

T

0.239

MCB

+

+

WBB

KCJ

+

0.000

AON

KCO

+

SB

T

KYE

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

MMA

MPA

+

+

.

+

0.000

0.. 012

0.060

0.003

0.000

+

+

+

+

0.016

0.057

0 012

0.032

0.000

+

+

+

+



+

+

+

0.204

0.351

0.187

0 327

0.197

0.000

0.247

0.312

0.219

0 279

0.238

0.474

0.000

+

+

+

+

+

+

T

T

+

+

0.359

0.1$3

0.1S4

0.1$0

0.236

0.198

0.304

0.384

0000

+

+

+

0.372

0.-101

0.219

0.094

0 205

0.089

0.297

0.365

0.253

0.000

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+



+

+

+

KCO

0.046

0.134

0.272

0.012

0.040

0 012

0.007

0.024

0.169

0.231

0.179

0. 112

0.000

KCJ

0 059

0.205

0.360

0.037

0 098

0.036

0.065

0.040

0.256

0.29(i

0.239

0. 16'1

0 041

0.000

+

+

0 025

0.027

0.253

0.297

0 210

0,165

0 019

0.056

0,000

+

+

MCB

0 057

0.151

0 319

0.008

0 056

MOB

0 056

0.176

0 345

0.055

0 085

0.019

0.058

0.042

0.286

0.300

0.214

0. 160

0 049

0.096

0.063

0.000

+

+

MDH

0 033

0 125

0,322

0.012

0.037

0.012

0,012

0.021

0.295

0.268

0.200

0,180

0.014

0,044

0.022

0 028

0.000

+

MKB

0.040

0.120

0.257

0.011

0 058

0 030

0 045

0.027

0. 149

0.256

0.182

0.092

0 024

0.047

0.017

0.056

0.037

0.000

0.010

0.013

.

.,.

+

0 031

PKP

RKR

TNA

+

+

+

+

+

+

0.047

+

PBP

+

+

+

+

.,.

T

+

+
+

+

+

+

+

+

MMA

0.030

0.113

0.277

0.018

0.033

0.023

0.037

0.019

0.203

0.259

0.187

0.10'1

0.017

0.062

0.023

0.032

MPA

1),029

0 114

0.296

0.025

0 081

0,028

0.057

0.030

0.252

0.272

0.224

0.073

0 039

0.068

0.054

0.064

0 038

0 035

0 024

0.000

PBP

0.029

0.126

0.327

0015

0.040

0.007

0.001

0.023

0.277

0.251

0.207

0 160

0 013

0.049

0.019

0.032

0.011

0 029

0.007

0.024

0.000

0.010

0 023

0.021

0.020

0.003

0.000

0.009

0.013

0.244

0 254

0.198

0.107

0018

0.035

0,Q31

0 0 1

0 033

0.010

0 218

0.262

0.202

0.083

0 012

0.027

0.019

0.035

O.Q15

0 011

0.01 1

0.013

0.009

0.007

0.000

0.011

a024

0.019

0.168

0.237

0158

0.099

0.019

0.036

O.Q23

0.0, 1

0.0,5

0.015

0.015

0,025

0.010

0.006

0.007

PKP

0.032

0 159

0.314

0.009

0.047

0.001

RKR

0 022

0 125

0.298

0.009

0 058

TNA

0.030

0.120

0.259

0.007

0.040

red and + indicates significance (< 0.05)

0 029

+

0,000

0.000

tribal populations from the analysis. This new MDS plot is shown in Figure 9b.
Assuming that geography might play some role in the distribution of genetic distance in
the caste populations, I colored the circles by geographical affinity, with red squares
indicating North Indian populations, blue squares indicating populations on the upper to
middle western coast of India, purple squares indicating populations on the eastern coast
of India, and green squares indicating South Indian populations. The Saraswat Brahmins
were grouped with the populations on the western coast due to their historical longtime
settlement in Goa and current placement in both the middle and lower areas of the
western coast. However, the plot did not show any geographic grouping of these
populations. Instead, there was no discernable pattern based on any previous population
structure evident in this plot.
There were five outliers in this plot including the Cochin Jews of Kerala in the
lower left quadrant, the Saraswat Brahmins and the Maharashtrian Parsis in the upper left
quadrant, and the Maharashtrian Desasth Brahmins and Bengali Sudras in the upper right
quadrant. Of these, the Bengali Sudras had a sample size of 11 individuals - all with
distinct haplotypes, thereby appearing as highly diverse even though the low sample size
indicates that it is not accurate to make this assumption. It is also interesting that the nonHindu, non-tribal groups represented in the larger data set were both outliers from the rest
of the caste populations.
Of primary importance, is the separation of Saraswat Brahmins from the rest of
the groups, with the exception of Parsis. This pattern will be further analyzed in Figure
10 by looking at a different representation of the genetic distances between populations.

Overall, this MDS plot indicates that Indian caste diversity does not fall into an expected

48

pattern of geographical differences. Not all of these groups clustered very closely
together when compared to Indian tribal populations. Thus, the tribe versus caste
differentiation is clearly a more significant factor than any internal caste population
differences.
The other way to represent this matrix of F ST values is by using it to generate
neighbor-joining (N-J) trees. N-J trees use the principle of"minimum evolution," which
was suggested as a method to use distance matrices to make phylogenetic trees that have
the shortest sum of branch lengths (Cavalli-Sforza and Edwards, 1967; Jobling et al.,
2004). The N-J method uses an iterative formula to find trees with the minimum total
branch length that is the closest to the optimal minimum evolution tree (Jobling et al.,
2004; Saitou and Nei, 1987). For the trees shown in Figure 10, I analyzed only the caste
populations since analyses with the tribal populations did not give high resolution of the
caste population relationships.

Figure 10a shows a cladogram made with the N-J method in which the branching
order of all 24 populations from the most recent common ancestor (represented by the
root) are outlined. It revealed that both Saraswat Brahmins and Maharashtrian Parsis
(MP A) branched off and differentiated themselves much earlier than the rest of the
populations represented in it. It is possible that this represents the high levels of
endogamous marriage practices evident through both Saraswat Brahmin and
Maharashtrian population history - especially in recent times. Another relevant
relationship seen in this cladogram is the clustering of the Bengali Brahmins (WBS) and
Maharashtrian Marathas (MMA), which are two lower caste groups represented in this
sample set.

49

While the cladograms indicated the divergence from a rooted ancestor, the same
N-J method and F ST matrix can be used to make an unrooted N-J tree, as seen in Figure
10b. This tree shows shows the two-dimensional relationships of populations based on

genetic distances. The important things to note about this tree are the large genetic
distances of the Bengali Sudras (WBS), the Cochin Jews (KCJ), and the Maharashtrian
Desasth Brahmins (MDB). The length of their branches indicates that they are relatively
distinct from the other comparative populations.

50

IV. Discussion and Conclusions
This study was designed with the intent of examining the genetic variation in a
unique Indian community, the Saraswat Brahmins, to elucidate their population history
and their place within the broader spectrum of Indian genetic diversity. The mtDNA
results from 110 individuals were been compared to those for 23 other Indian populations
with a wide range of affiliations, geographic locations, and backgrounds. The hypothesis
of this study was that the Saraswat Brahmins would show genetic signatures of a highly
endogamous group, and have different affinities to other Indian groups based on possible
admixture during their migratory routes and similar origins.
As the Analysis and Interpretation Section of this thesis shows, there are many
interesting conclusions that can be drawn from careful inspection of the data resulting.
The Saraswat Brahmin community is certainly a unique world population. Elements of
its haplotype and haplogroup variation show evidence oflow maternal diversity with a
high predominance of basal M types. In addition, the Indian-specific West Eurasian
types (N and R) found within the Saraswat Brahmin data set are more indicative of ties to
Inda-European Aryan communities rather than from tribal populations, establishing the
Saraswat Brahmins as a caste community. Overall, the mtDNAs observed in Saraswat
Brahmins are primarily Indian-specific haplotypes that are closely related to many of
those appearing in Northern Indian populations. The results - in concert with legendary,
historical, linguistic, and cultural elements - point to the northern Indian origins of the
Saraswat Brahmin community. Statistical measures indicate that the community
experienced a population expansion some time in the past, rather than undergoing recent
subdivisions that reduced diversity in the population. This observation supports the

51

AMOV A results on the religious sub-structure within the community, which indicated
that there are no significant genetic differences between the four religious sub-castes,
most likely because of the freedom of intermarriage propagated between these sub-castes.
While this analysis did not incorporate a similar sample size in each set, it could indicate
trends that might arise even when all of the sub-communities are equally sampled.
When compared to other Indian populations, Saraswat Brahmins exhibit values
well within the ranges of general Indian diversity, although they appeared as outliers in
MDS plots of F ST genetic values. This pattern could indicate their highly endogamous
nature with low admixture, since their early branching from other Indian populations
could indicate that they experienced little admixture with these groups for some time. It
is hard to ascertain the degree of admixture with other Indian populations based on
maternal evidence alone, but a more complete picture using Y-chromosome data would
probably fill out the preliminary indications of very low direct and recent admixture.
Rather, it is probably more likely that the Saraswat Brahmin population arose from the
same ancestors as many of the other populations. The same can be said for their
migratory route, although it seems clear that they migrated from the north and moved into
the south at later dates.
The complexity of interpreting the results from the Saraswat Brahmin data set
also aligns them with other Indian populations. The mitochondrial gene pool of India
seems to be an intricate web of complex population structures. The overall analysis of
this study shows that there are clear distinctions between the tribal and caste populations
present on the subcontinent. Results ofhaplogroup comparisons show that although caste
populations have many Indian-specific types, they appear at a very high frequency in the

52

tribal populations, with no evidence of West Eurasian admixture. As with the Saraswat
Brahmin data, all Indian populations have many undifferentiated M types. The diversity
of macrohaplogroup M in India indicates that it has had a long time to diversify and
establish itself as the major lineage throughout India. However, these data also indicate
that more work needs to be done to differentiate these haplotypes so as to better
understand the origins of this important macrohaplogroup before it spread to the rest of
the world. The same is true with respect to the N and R types that are autochthonous to
India. These types are interesting remnants of either the original out-of-Africa
haplogroups or more recent Indo-Aryan arrivals to the subcontinent.
When focusing on the caste populations of India, it is clear that there are multiple
factors which play a role in determining the genetic affinities, relationships, and branches
of these comparison populations. From the summary statistics, AMOVA estimates, and
genetic distance representations, there is no one element among geographic, linguistic,
and religious affiliations that creates absolute divisions within the society. This
observation is quite interesting, since many other areas of the world have principal factors
that enable a classification of subpopulations. Genetics can be added to the growing list
of factors such as culture, religion, and language that are too complex to describe as
singular features. Instead, it is necessary to take all of them into account when putting
together the population history of the subcontinent.
Although this study points towards many interesting conclusions and factors that
are useful in elucidating Saraswat Brahmin and general Indian population history, it also
strongly points to further research that will be necessary to obtain a more complete
picture. Many specific samples in the Saraswat Brahmin data set need to be further typed

53

for intriguing markers. To continue the mtDNA work, I would like to focus on (1) the
Indian-specific N and R types found in the sample set, (2) the further analysis of the
subhaplogroup age estimates with more in-depth typing, and (3) comparisons with other
highly endogamous communities. Additionally, the Y-chromosome data from the
Saraswat Brahmins will help to provide a clearer picture of the migratory patterns,
variable admixture rates, and possible influence from non-Indian populations because of
differential male and female gene flow. The soon-to-arrive samples from the Dogra lab
in India will also increase the data set, which in turn will help us to make a stronger
statistical case for any conclusions raised here.
As has been stated many times before, the diversity of Indian populations
represents an important area that has been underrepresented in genetics research. It is
clear from this study of Saraswat Brahmins as a group and as part of the broader Indian
gene pool that there are many complex patterns and trends that can be elucidated with
more samples from more populations. The uniqueness oflndia lies not in its multifaceted population structure, but rather in the ability for those multiple facets to mix with
each other, influence each other, and still find a way to maintain distinctions while
together into one nation. It is this intermingled nature of the discernable homogeneous
units of Indian society that must be tapped by geneticists to help study the complexity of
human genetics.

54

Figure 1. The Proposed Migration Route of Saraswat Brahm ins

LANGUAGE FAMILIES IN
SOUTH ASIA
lndo-European
 Dravidian
Ti be to-Burman

0

 Munda


Mon-Khmer

The black line indicates the legendary and scholarly assumed migratory pattern of
Saraswat Brahminsfrom North India down to Goa. The yellow dotted lines indicate the
outward migrations from Goa into surrounding areas ofSaraswat Brahmin settlement
down the Western 'Konkan ' coast ofIndia.

55

Figure 2: Generational Birth Locations of Saraswat Brahmins

- ~
\

MUmbai

C)
USA





Burma

Mala w i



Participants



Parents

D

Grandpare nts

Village

Town

City

Participants

20%

29%

51%

Parents af Participants

45%

30%

25%

46.50%

30%

23.50%

Grandparents al' Participants

Each pie chart indicates the percentage of each generation that was born in a
particular locale. This map indicates the distribution ofSaraswat Brahmins across the
western coast o,fIndia after migration out ofGoa.

56

Figure 3: Saraswat Brahmin Network

Vl

--.l

This network
indicates the
wide
distribution
ofSaraswat
Brahmin
haplotypes.
The majority
ofthe
haplotypes
are IndoEuropean
Indianspecific
types, but
each branch
is unusually
diverse with
a large
number of
mutational
positions per
lineage.

R5
1------------

'\

'

_._

\.

-.~

J 10 ..._......._

~

\

\

\~

-~

.,___ \

IS.Qt

\

;;;;~.__

.~<

-------

-

~

/

__.ft>'.'_,._).$.~-

~-,.,,;w----~I...

U1
!

.

~

--

_.,.

/

-=

i.ir_,-;ao

,

[01'>,. -~

! co---"'"""

(\

',.,_

--.,

-~-

U2a

~
I

IOQ .

/

/
>;:l

J!!Q

',.___......-

U2b

\.
Tt.,t

I

:l,I M'

::t.

\

.v;

i

\

/r,:l"\,

j _.

.

./

_JU

C, I

.i

.,.

((o~

---1 -~-----~...r...._ --.''-\
. _l
'';
"'
m4;_
.- . .__. / U7

->"'

' o
J')

\. i

.! I

\

'

I . ',

\

:"-,;
I

\

-l.,
-\

: 0I
1 0
'i1

\

' \'

;r;

b

,

-:,;p

~ ,,)' O

I / .,,,,.. l&S
" __

IJ

,,..JW
.,._p

_,...------

o 11 M6

\

:!>Q

\I

...,_
I',~

\

:iQ

i

-

~
-

'
t\l

,

'

'-...,._
190

.

------ _...!

'\.

m.i~ --

.

\'

~; ,.~
\

-

/

..

18"0

' '\
'

:,o

I

./!

,-/ ....

~- __is

------.__

I

~,.,!,



.. .... .

~~--~
---,,.,___--=---.
.
..

\

I"'\

,

I

!~
~- /'

";.1;4

I
1~0

~-

\

.,, ),(

0~1 /

"\

.,

_'-0

-v...

....

isi

}..

~o \\
; _.,"
U2c

\

\

/

m>J_..v-_-

' ------ .

.

~

\

L

'~

MS

_,.- - ... ,,.

/

/

.,,,--

,i,1 ,k'I'

/

\

0
1.1 , . -., ,. . .

,09

\

.

'---

7'd .I
/

,,,

)

m,;. ~

/

'/

'

\

\

350
.

O

m:il 

,,{

/

Y.

. .. ....,

'

/

1

I

/

,.:;o,

M3

) " ':

'

ln\9

~ni

m ,z,,.,..,.,.._,..,_ O--....,.,i f:I-~ ,

/

=---_.;;a,.

. - -.,.

fr,

\g

..

;\,

\

\

\ ,.,,... I~

\

0----,----,, .;_ _ .,...,_.. - - 0 ~,e.

Q

8

I I

--,.,.___

l!

.

11b

o/'

--..

gi- \I 1IJJ I .<>'
, '.If
r ?.
0
I

,s.;.

t- 

~".'.:.;,

33

\

.,

I_

I .

ffl21.-~

\ .

' ....,

/

O

~

/
so

,. :,Q

/

~.

/

,. . .---.. ......

/

.

.-------.....

~

\ .

";'l

"\,~,

,,

0

l

''"

n;....

/ '~

~
,
,I,

\,

'\

\.

\\

\

'."""t

\

.

='\'

~,\ __

' "'.:I

M4

_,.

_, \
-

~,o

M2

N
/.,.,. . -- .,--._~
.,,..,. 0
:,:; .\
\,

J
/ --.. . . . .
/ -Q ,.

M25

Figure 4: Percentages ofHaplogroups in Saraswat Brahmins

a. Saraswat Brahmin Macrohaplogroup Diversity

b. Saraswat Brahmin M Subhaplogroup Diversity
M
 M2

oM3
oM4
 M5

o M6
 M7

oM8
 M18

l!I M25

c. Saraswat Brahmin U Subhaplogroup Diversity

U


U1a

oU2
o U2a


U2b

o U2c
 U2e

o U3
 U4

1!1 U5

o U6
cU7

58

Figure 5: Saraswat Brahmin Pairwise Mismatch Distributions

a. Saraswat Brahmin Mismatch

Distribution

800
700
0
C: 600
(I)
...
:! 500
'6 400
"O
Q) 300
...(I)> 200
Ill
,Q
100
0
0
Ill

(I)

0

3

2

7

6

5

4

9

8

10

11

12

13

number of differences

Mean pairwise differences= 5.56
Raggedness index = 0.0064
N = 110
b. M Mis match Distribution - Saraswat Brahm ins

11016=

500 6 J

11i~i-g ;;
~

100
0 +--+---1--1--l--+--1--1--1---1----<~-I==+----,..~
0

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13

# of differences

Mean pairwise differences= 4.08
Raggedness index= 0.008
N = 78
c.

RMlsmatch  Saraswat Brahm ins

80
70
60

50
40
30

20
10
0

-l--+-,----,---,.- +--+-l--l---1--1---1--l--1=~o
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14

Mean pairwise differences= 7.81
Raggedness index= 0.1
N = 25

59

14

15

16

Figure 6: Mutt Distribution Network

J

RS

0\
0

This network
indicates the
unspecific
distribution of
various Mutt
haplo types.
The yellow
nodes indicate
samples
belonging to
Kashi Mutt,
the red nodes
indicate
Chitrapur
Saraswat
Mutt, the
nodes circles
indicate
Gokarn
Parthagali
Mutt, and the
green nodes
indicate

Kavle Mutt.

  --.

~

/' q

/ - ---.--

0\

\ \.
"I

\

\'

\

:-C

"'

\.

\'

. ------

\

. -

~

/,

'

_I>,-.~. -

\

0---

1 ,

--H"'/

U2a

..

.s,t;~--

; ,;



\

;1 , li\J

I"
,

i

/

----.

/-1\--:----~:>
_., ,

;,,"/
.) I f _,/



~

.// \\

: I

\ .I

1 1,1.

o

I

\

\

 . . . '-U2c
. .-  -

. . ... ...
U2b

\

/

i;:,..

/

1;.: 1

;,<....o .


.---

~_

..............,'

--~----D !J MS
___,.,

-----'<
_

'

-~

, ,---m.,~....__

\'~

~!

I~

' .

\

~

J

0

31,'

/

, -.....____

~ \J,,

U7

~ -

.



,..

\,;. \
'\\ .
\

.

I

\1.,
,\

"', . \
"

/

1

..;

<-~

111 ~{

,,

o--- __,._

....-,,

I

.,,,

/

0

,,, -

;/,/
II ,,w..--/

._____,.._

MS

/ _,
w' .,,.-v
" /
"oi<" __,...

.

'i

_,

,:;u-

-

, t!."<

' i'' I

.

,,

,;:-;

,.

"

;'$

t)"


, ; Y

"'"
\ "

M3

t"" .I ,.
i
,

\J

y{

-1

_..,:;;--

 ..,...........1. .

'"'f

,

,.

..... .

0

,-H.._

\ ~

r:,

-lll"iT"  

......

\

i1\

-.

- ~

.,.,,.-__,..

1

\

'~

__,.-.

\

l

'<\,;,

0----',-.:.;

T ,,,\

..0

' .

\.

' 
._....
_,,,
,'

r\
J, \

1

..

o .., 'x \ ><..

U1

O

~

;

\

\.

~,

\"

\.

/

~\ +
't ;''

/"'

..1

\ "

,

'

-

t\~
I

,,

'."'

,

\\
I

o . . ..,,. . .

M4

i,,

\

--

M2

N

....

, .

),

\

, ,

,.

0\

~



:N.,

,

\ .I'"'-.
~\

b

''o
---

~

M25

Figure 7: Distribution of Comparative Populations

 Mtypes

D

R types

 N types
Each piechart on the map is proportional to the number ofsamples analyzed from the
state the pie chart is placed on. Circles outlined in black indicate caste populations,
while those outlined in red indicate tribal populations. The individual pie charts
represent the macrohaplogroup percentages found in that state 's overall populations
usedfor this comparative study.

61

Figure 8: Variance of Haplogroups
a) Variance of Haplogroup across South Asian Populations

._f--1-

80%

-

1-

,_

_

L__L..._L__L__

L..._L..._L__L__

-

- -

-

-

-

I

,n

Q.

::,

!!

I

w
C.

..
..

:,:
C:

..
~

40%

1------1-- - - - - - - 1 - - - - -

20%

-

- - -

-

1--

l-l-

-

l--

1-

L__

L__

-

ll.

-

-

1--

1--

-

-

I-

-

-

-

-

I-

-

-

-

L..._

L____

-

L__

0%-1-L..L...-.LJ.._L..L...-.LJ.._L.L,...L..L,....L.L,...L..L,....L.L,...L..L,....L.L,...L..L,....L.L,...LJ..,....L.L,...L..L,....L.L,..LL_ _.u..,....L.L..-LL..-L.L..-.LJ..,....L.U

Populations

b) Variance of M subhaplogroups
100%

80%

Q.

::,

!!

<II
0

..

60%

C.
,;;:

-"
::,

"'C:..
~

40%

"

ll.

20%

0%

~~~~,~~~&~~~,~&.~#
~
~
~ ~ ~
0
~ ~
~ ~ ~ ~
~ ..,
~ ~

~

Populations

62

c) Variance of U subhaplogroups

~
:s
0

a,

..
0

a.
.c

.c

:s

Cl)
C:

a,

~

a,

a..

Populations

63

Figure 9: Multidimensional Scaling Plots
a. MDS Plot for All Comparison Populations
2

------------------
---------

aga

1

aon

J{.m
B



0


-1
kye

N
C

kku





0

-2

(f)

C
Q)

kkm

E

i5



-3

-4

-2

-3

-1

1

0

2

4

3

Dimension 1
Tribal populations are indicated with blue squares, while caste populations indicated by red squares - are all clustered in the middle ofthe plot.
b. MDS Plot with only caste populations
.. .

2.0

-~


mdb

mpa

1 .5





1 .0
mma

kbh

.S '

~r


0.0

-



N
C
0

-1.0

'

(f)

C
Q)

E
0

-1.5

~ mdh


wtib


kco


kcj
a

mcb


'

-2.0
-3



tnaJ f:pbp

" '"'

- .S '

wbs



kka

Q

-

-2

-

-

-1

0

Nortl'ilt>dla

Q wr.o1.meo.s1 r,1 1r1<f,.

a

 Eutair, CDul ol 1,,....
 Sg.ar,lndl~

-

-

2

-

3

Dimension 1
The higher resolution on the center caste cluster shows the distribution ofcaste
populations (red: North India, blue: Western coast, purple: Eastern coast, green: South
India).

64

Figure 10: Graphical Representations of the Neighbor-Joining Phylogenetic Method
a. Neighbor-Joining Rooted Clad:Jlam
WBB
---HCB
lrfKB

--------WBS
KKA

MDH
PBP
TNA

GGU

------MDB
PKP
KBH

-------Kc.I
RICR

- - --SB

b. Neighbor-Joining Unrooted Phylogenetic Tree

65

MDB

Appendix I (2 pages)
INFORMED CONSENT FORM
The Genetic History of the Saraswat Brahmins: Origins and Affinities with Indian
Populations
Principal Investigator. Theodore G. Schurr, Ph.D., Assistant Professor
Department of Anthropology, University of Pennsylvania,
325 University Mnscum, 3260 South Street, Philadelphia, PA. 19104-6398
Tel#: 215-573-7632; Email: tgschurr@sas.upcnn.edu
Co//aborators: Ms. Athma A. Pai
63 Westover Lane, Stamford CT 06902
Tel#: (203) 912-0533; Email: aapai@sas.upenn.edu

Invitation to Participate: You arc invited to participate in a study of genetic variation of
the Saraswat Brahmins to investigate their history and migrations in South Asia.
Purpose: In this research project, we will survey your mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and Y
chromosome genes for sequence variation. Small mutations in these portions of your
genome create genetic markers that can be used to characterize human populations. These
changes identify specific genetic lineages within human populations that can be traced
through maternal (mtDNA) and paternal (Y chromosome) lineages. For these reasons, we
can trace these mutations through human families from the present to the distant past with
considerable accuracy. We can also reconstruct patterns of human movement through
geographic areas by tracking the spread of these lineages in different human groups. We
have included a packet with further material explaining mtDNA and Y chromosome
variation in general and specifically in India.
Procedures: If you decide to participate, we will ask you to provide us with a buccal (cheek)
cell sample. The materials included in this package contain the items that arc needed to
obtain this sample. They include two cheek swab kits in individual wrappers and two vials
of buffer. Open one of the swab kits, rub the serrated part of the head vigorously (without
drawing blood) up and down on the inside of your mouth about 10 times on both sides of
your mouth, then eject the head into a vial by pushing down on the narrow end of the shaft.
Seal the cap of the vial securely. Repeat this procedure with the other swab kit and vial.
This procedure requires only 5-10 minutes, and will not subject you to any significant health
risks. We will also ask you to complete a short questionnaire about your family history,
which should require no more than a few minutes to complete.
information will help
us to interpret the results of your genetic tests, and will not be shared with anyone not
associated with this project at Penn.

This

We have enclosed a pre-addressed envelope for you to use when mailing the buccal cell
samples to Dr. Schurr's laboratory at the University of Pennsylvania. DNA will be extracted
from the buccal cell samples, and then analyzed for mtDNA and Y-chromosome variation
using molecular biology methods. We will report the results of the genetic analyses to you
by mail or email. Upon the completion of the study, the DNA samples will be destroyed to
prevent further use of them outside of the parameters of this project.

66

Risks or Discomfort to Participant: The buccal cell collection procedure requires only a
few minutes to complete, and may result in very minor discomfort. Beyond the temporary
discomfort, this procedure will subject you to no other significant health risks.
Benefits to Participant: There are no direct benefits to you as a result of your participation
in this study. However, it is our hope that, by analyzing the sequence variation in the DNA
from your buccal cells, we will be able to more fully elucidate the history of the Saraswat
Brahmins.
Confidentiality: During the research project, all genetic and genealogical data will be kept
in computerized form in the PI's laboratory, and accessed by only those persons involved in
the project (Pai and Schutt). Any data under the researchers' control will be disclosed in
scientific reports or public presentations in a manner that does not reveal your identity. The
data obtained by the analysis of your DNA will also be made available to you upon your
request.
In addition, your genetic data may be shown to Indian scientists who are collaborating with
Dr. Schurr on the analysis of Saraswat Brahmin populations from North America and India.
They are working together to better understand the biological history of the Sarawsats. In
this case, no identifying information will be_ass_ociated with your genetic data; only the
number associated with your DNA sample will be provided to the Indian researchers to
maintain your privacy. If you don't wish for your data to be shared, then you can simply
indicate this preference to Dr. Schurr and Ms, Pai, and they will not include your data in the
information to be sha.red with their Indian colleagues.
Compensation and Medical Treatment: While there is minimal risk to you in taking
buccal cell samples, should any discomfort arise during this process, please do not proceed
with the procedure. There will also be no financial compensation for your participation.
Research Contacts: Should you have any questions about this project or your rights as a
research participant, please contact the Dr. Schurr at the mailing address, telephone number,
or email address provided above.
Terms of Participation: Your participation in this research project is completely voluntary,
and you may withdraw from it at any time.
Conclusion: You have read and understand the consent form. You agree to participate in this
research study.

Name of Participant

Signature of Participant

67

Date

Appendix II (1 page)
GENEALOGICAL INFORMATION

The Genetic History of the Saraswat Brahmins: Origins and Affinities with Indian
Populations
Principal Investigator: Theodore G. Schurr, Ph.D., Assistant Professor
Department of Anthropology, University of Pennsylvania
325 University Museum, 3260 South Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6398
Tel#: 215-573-7632; Email: tgschurr@sas.upenn.edu
Collaborator: Ms. Athma A. Pai
63 Westover Lane, Stamford, CT 06902
Tel#: (203) 912-0533; Email: aapai@sas.upenn.edu

Sample#_ _ _ _ _ __

Date Collected- - - - - - - -

Name

-------------

Place of Birth- - - - - - - - -

Ethnicity_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

Mother's Name

--------------

Place of Birth- - - - - - - - -

Ethnicity_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

Family Religious Math: Kashi_ _ Gokarn Partagali_ _ Kavle _ _ Chitrapur _ _
Other:- - - - - - - Father's Name

---------------

Place of Birth- - - - - - - - -

Ethnicity_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

Family Religious Math: Kashi_ _ Gokarn Partagali_ _ Kavle_ _ Chitrapur _ _
Other:- - - - - - - Maternal Grandmother

------------

Place of Birth- - - - - - - - -

Ethnicity_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

Maternal Grandfather- - - - - - - - - - - - Place of Birth._________

Ethnicity_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

Paternal Grandmother- - - - - - - - - - - Place of Birth - - - - - - - - -

Ethnicity_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

Paternal Grandfather- - - - - - - - - - - - Place of Birth- - - - - - - - -

Ethnicity- - - - - - - - - - - -

Additional Notes:

68

Appendix III (3 pages)
Indian Genetic Diversity: A Study of Saraswat Brahmins
Principal Investigator: Theodore G. Schurr, Ph.D., Assistant Professor
Department of Anthropology, University of Pennsylvania
325 University Museum, 3260 South Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6398
Tel#: 215-573-7632; Email: tgschurr(al,sas.upenn.edu
Collaborator: Ms. Athma A. Pai
63 Westover Lane, Stamford, CT 06902
Tel#: (203) 912-0533; Email: aapai@sas.upenn.edu

Molecular Anthropology is a field that combines the power of genetics and
anthropological techniques to delve into the past. Using specific autosomal,
mitochondrial, and Y-chromosome markers, molecular anthropologists can work to
answer questions of origins, migrations, evolution patterns, and cultural practices. Past
work has included the use of DNA mutation rates to calibrate a molecular evolution
clock, tracing of populations back to ancestral homelands, and linking a group of people
to a notable ancestor. This particular study aims to address questions of Indian Genetic
Diversity by studying Saraswat Brahmin mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and Ychromosome marker patterns. We hope to achieve the following:
1)
2)
3)
4)

Examine the general genetic diversity present within the community
Measure the degrees of genetic mixing with other Indian communities
Investigate possible migration routes into South India
Compare Saraswats with non-Indian populations which might have come into
contact with Saraswats.

Ultimately, we hope to use Saraswat Brahmin genetic diversity results to propose a model
for the uniqueness and variation within the larger arena of Indian genetic diversity.
Please note that this study will be looking at Saraswat Brahmins at a population
level. No samples will be assessed on an individual basis. Due to the nature of
recruitment for this study (ie. no two samples from the same immediate family), paternity
or maternity issues cannot and will not come into question. Also, there is no such thing
as proving that a person is not a Saraswat Brahmin through genetics. All populations
have genetic variation, and that is exactly what we are trying to study.
Molecular Markers: mitochondrial and Y-chromosome DNA

Both mitochondrial and Y-chromosome DNA studies are commonly used to study
population studies. This two types of DNA are particularly useful since they are
indicative of maternal and paternal lineages respectively.
Mitochondrial DNA is a circular DNA fragment which is about 16,000 base pairs
long. Each person (both male and female) inherits their mtDNA from their mother, so
looking at mtDNA variation is a study of a maternal lineage. There is a coding region
(genes which are translated into proteins) and a non-coding region on mtDNA. Both of

69

these regions have characteristic mutations that can be assessed by molecular biology
techniques to assign a maternal haplogroup, or genetic lineage, to the person. These
haplogroups have been well studied for their place of origin, evolution time, and the
frequencies in various world populations. mtDNA haplogroup frequencies are often used
to assess group or female migration patterns, cultural patterns, population variance, and
species variation among all primate species.
The Y-chromosome works a little differently than mtDNA, since it is comprised
of nuclear DNA. Since it is a sex chromosome, the Y-chromosome undergoes very little
recombination with other chromosomes, and is purely paternally inherited. Given its
nature as a sex chromosome defining the male gender, only males can be studied for Ychromosome variation. Two regions on the Y-chromosome, the Non-Recombining
Region (NRY) and the Sex Determining Region (SRY), have characteristic mutations
that again can be assessed to assign a paternal haplogroup. Y-chromosome variation is
often used to study male migration patterns, cultural patterns, and population variance.

Overall Indian Genetic Diversity
The large diversity of traditions and cultural practices of people on the Indian
subcontinent has lead to an intensification of genetic diversity research of Indian
communities (Baig et al. 2004, Barnshad et al. 2001). Remarkably, approximately one
fifth of the human gene pool belongs primarily to people inhabiting the Indian
subcontinent (Kivisild et al. 1999). Early work has been focused upon estimating the
distinctions between groups in the well-known Indian caste system, delineating protoAsian versus West Eurasian origins of peoples, estimating molecular dates for waves of
settlement of the subcontinent, and mapping genetic data onto language trees (Baig et al.
2004, Bamshad et al. 2001, Kivisild et al. 1999, Kivisild et al. 2003, Palanichamy et al.
2004). Mitochondrial and Y chromosome work is especially relevant for Indian
populations because initial results have shown that Indian lineages contain some very
early branches of common haplotypes (Kivisild et al. 1999, Palanicharny et al. 2004).
Much of the population genetics work focused upon the South Asian continent has been
centered around solving problems of major haplogroup (M, N, and R) differentiation and
clustering, caste differentiation, and regional variation.

Previous Saraswat Brahmin Genetic Studies
Though well-studied for their culture and religious practices, there has been little
to no genetic work done on the Saraswat Brahmin community. The complex migratory
patterns and high degree of endogamy as a minority high-caste Indian group makes the
community an interesting target for genetic work. The only ascertainable work that has
been done on Saraswats was a 1976 blood study by Bhatia et. al. which looked at ABO
and Rhesus blood markers in members of the community in various Indian cities (Bhatia
et al. 1976). This study was able to conclude limited information about high degrees of
geographic separation and endogamy affecting genetic variation, however, increased
technology and knowledge of genetic ancestry markers will be able to give more precise
results. An interesting addendum to the Bhatia et. al. study was the conclusion that
Saraswats might have been genetically influenced by Greek invasions in Punjab due to

70

notable levels of a particular thalessimia found in both Greeks and Saraswats (Bhatia et
al. 1976, Patil 1970). A possible finding of Greek ancestry among the group would be
quite remarkable. Work on Saraswat Brahmins can be contributed to this effort of
categorizing the genetic history oflndians and possibly provide an example to understand
the nuances of admixture and migration on the Indian subcontinent.

LABORATORY OF MOLECULAR ANTHROPOLOGY

Department of Anthropology, University of Pennsylvania
The Laboratory of Molecular Anthropology at UPenn is run by Dr. Theodore
Schurr. The lab has several projects being conducted at the moment, which range from
studies of molecular genetic variation in Altaian ethnic groups to biomedical studies of
mtDNA diseases in Slavic populations to studies of Holocene archeological populations
from the Lake Baikal region. There are quite a few other specific population diversity
projects as well, including Afghani, Mongolian, and Caucasus regional genetic diversity
studies. For more information about the lab and projects, please visit
http://www. sas. upenn. edul~tgschurr
The lab recently received the honor of being chosen as the North American center
for the prestigious worldwide Genographic Project launched by the National Geographic
Society in order to study human evolution, history, and migrations through genetic
studies. This 5 year project with 10 regional bases around the world will help to better
understand global genetic diversity in a way that has never been considered before. The
results from this study on Saraswat Bralunin diversity could possibly be integrated into
the Genographic Project database in the future. For more information about the
Genographic Project (including more background information about population genetic
markers), please visit:
http://www. nationalgeographic. com/genographic

1

Baig MM, Khan AA, and Kulkarni KM. (2004) Mitochondrial DNA Diversity in Tribal and Caste Groups
ofMaharastra (India) and its Implications on Their Genetic Origins. Annals a/Human Genetics
68:453-60.
2
Barnshad M, Kivisild T, Watkins WS, et al. (2001) Genetic Evidence on the Origins of Indian Caste
Populations. Genome Research 11:994-1004.
3
Bhatia HM, Shanbhag SR, Baxi AJ, et al. Genetic Studies among Endogamous Groups of Saraswats in
Western India. Hum. Hered. 26:458-67.
4
Jobling MA, Hurles ME, and Tyler-Smith C. (2004) Human Evolutionary Genetics: Origins, Peoples, and
Disease. Garland Science: New York.
5
Kivisild T, Bamshad MJ, Kaldma K, et al. (1999) Deep common ancestry oflndian and western-Eurasian
mitochondrial DNA lineages. Current Biology 9: 1-5.
6
Kivisild T, Rootsi S, Metspalu M, et al. (2003) The Genetic Heritage of the Earliest Settlers Persists Both
in Indian Tribal and Caste Populations. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 72:313-332.
7
The Genographic Project. (2006) National Geographic Society.
http://www.nationalgeographic.com/genographic
8
Palanichamy MG, Sun C, Agrawal Set al. (2004) Phylogeny of Mitochondrial DNA Macrohaplogroup N
in India, Based on Complete Sequencing: Implications for the Peopling of South Asia. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 75:966-978.
9
Patil V. (1970) Saraswats. The Illustrated Weekly of India 26:6-19.

71

References Cited:

Baig M, Khan A, and Kulkarni K (2004) Mitochondrial DNA diversity in tribal and caste
groups of Maharashtra (India) and its implications on their genetic origins. Annals
of Human Genetics 68:453-460.
Bamshad M, Kivisild T, Watkins W, Dixon M, Ricker C, Rao B, Naidu J, Prasad B,
Reddy P, Rasanayagam A, Papiha S, Villems R, Redd A, Hammer M, Nguyen S,
Carroll M, Batzer M, and Jorde L (200 I) Genetic Evidence on the Origins of
Indian Caste Populations. Genome Research 11:994-1004.
Bandel! H-J, Forster P, and Rohl A (1999) Median-joining networks for inferring
intraspecific phylogenies. Molecular Biology and Evolution 16:37-48.
Bandel! H-J, Forster P, Sykes B, and Richards M (1995) Mitochondrial portraits of
human populations using median networks." Genetics 141:743-753.
Basu A, Mukherjee N, Roy S, Sengupta S, Banerjee S, Chakraborty M, Dey B, Roy M,
Roy B, Bhattacharyya N, Roychoudhury S, and Majumder P (2003) Ethnic India:
A Genomic View, With Special Reference to Peopling and Structure. Genome
Research 13:2277-2290.
Bhatia H, Shanbhag S, Baxi A, Bapat J, Sathe M, Sharma R, Kabeer H, Bharucha Z, and
Surlacar L (1976) Genetic Studies among Endogamous Groups of Saraswats in
Western India. Human Heredity 26:458-467.
Cavalli-Sforza L, and Edwards A (1967) Phylogenetic analysis: models and estimation
procedures. Evolution 21:550-570.
Census (1991) Census of India: Government of India.
Conlon F (I 977) A Caste in a Changing World: The Chitrapur Saraswat Brahmans, I 7001935. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Cordaux R, Saha N, Bentley G, Aunger R, Sirajuddin S, and Stoneking M (2003)
Mitochondrial DNA analysis reveals diverse histories of tribal populations from
India. European Journal of Human Genetics 11 :253-264.
Excoffier L, Laval G, and Schneider S (2005) Arlequin (version 3.0): An integrated
software package for population genetics data analysis. Evolutionary
Bioinformatics Online 1:47-50.
Excoffier L, Smouse P, and Quattro J (1992) Analysis of molecular variance inferred
from metric distances among DNA haplotypes: Application to mitochondrial
DNA restriction data. Genetics 131.

72

Felsenstein J (1998) PHYLIP (Phylogeny Interference Package), version 3.572c. Seattle,
University of Washington: Distributed by author.
Forster P, Harding R, Torroni A, and Bandelt H-J (1996) Origin and evolution of Native
American mtDNA variation: A reappraisal. American Journal of Human Genetics
59:935-45.
Gaikwad S, and Kashyap V (2005) Molecular Insight into the genesis of ranked caste
populations of western India based upon polymorphisms across non-recombinant
and recombinant regions in genome. Genome Biology 6:10.
Ingman M, Kaessmann H, Paabo S, and Gyllensten U (2000) Mitochondrial genome
variation and the origin of modem humans. Nature 408:708-713.
Jobling M, Hurles M, and Tyler-Smith C (2004) Human Evolutionary Genetics: Origins,
Peoples & Disease. New York, NY: Garland Science.
Kerri C, ed. ( 1998) Saraswats: in Goa and Beyond. Vasco-da-Gama, Goa, India: Murgaon
Mutt Sandul Samiti.
Kivisild T, Bamshad M, Kaldma K, Metspalu M, Metspalu E, Reidla M, Laos S, Parik J,
Watkins W, Dixon M, Papiha S, Mastana S, Mir M, Ferak V, and Villems R
(1999a) Deep common ancestry oflndian and Western-Eurasian mitochondrial
DNA lineages. Current Biology 9:1-5.
Kivisild T, Kaldma K, Metspalu M, Parik J, Papiha S, and Villems R (1999b) The Place
of the Indian mtDNA Variants in the Global Network of Maternal Lineages and
the Peopling of the Old World. In R Delea, S Papiha and R Chakraborty (eds.):
Genomic Diversity: Applications in Human Population Genetics: Klumer
Academic Plenum Publishers, pp. 135-152.
Kivisild T, Papiha S, Rootsi S, Parik J, Kaldma K, Reidla M, Laos S, Metspalu M,
Pielberg G, Adojaan M, Metspalu E, Mastana S, Wang Y, Gaige M, Demirtas H,
Schnakenberg E, Stefano Gd, Geberhiwot T, Claustres M, and Villems R (2000)
An Indian Ancestry: a Key for Understanding Human Diversity in Europe and
Beyond. In C Renfrew and K Boyle (eds.): Archaeogenetics: DNA and the
population prehistory of Europe. Cambridge, United Kingdom: McDonald
Institute for Archaeological Research, pp. 267-275.
Kivisild T, Rootsi S, Metspalu M, Mastana S, Kaldma K, Parik J, Metspalu E, Adojaan
M, Tolk H-V, Stepanov V, Gaige M, Usanga E, Papiha S, Cinnioglu C, King R,
Cavalli-Sforza L, Underhill P, and Villems R (2003) The Genetic Heritage of the
Earliest Settlers Persists Both in Indian Tribal and Caste Populations. American
Journal of Human Genetics 72:313-332.

73

Maca-Meyer N, Gonzalez A, Pestano J, Flores C, Larruga J, and Cabrera V (2003)
Mitochondrial DNA transit between West Asia and North Africa inferred from
U6 phylogeography. BMC Genetics 4:15.
Majwnder P (1998) People ofindia: biological diveristy and affinities. Evolutionary
Anthropology 6:100-110.
Maniatis T, Fritsch E, and Sambrook J (1982) Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual.
New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.
Metspalu M, Kivisild T, Metspalu E, Parik J, Hudjashov G, Kaldma K, Serk P, Karmin
M, Behar D, Gilbert M, Endicott P, Mastana S, Papiha S, Skorecki K, Torroni A,
and Villems R (2004) Most of the extant mtDNA boundaries in South and
Southwest Asia were likely shaped during the initial settlement of Eurasia by
anatomically modern humans. BMC Genetics 5:26.
Morral N, Bertranpetit J, Estivill X, Nunes V, Casals T, Gimenez J, Reis A, VaronMateeva R, Macek M, Kalaydijieva L, Angelicheva D, Dancheva R, Romeo G,
Russo M, Garnerone G, Perrari M, Magnani C, Claustres M, Desgeorges M,
Schwartz M, Schwartz M, Dallapiccola B, Novelli G, Ferec C, Arce Md, Nemeti
M, Kere J, Anvret M, Dahl N, and Kadasi L (1994) The origin of the major cystic
fibrosis mutation (delta F508) in European populations. Nature Genetics 7: 169175.
Mountain J, Hebert J, Bhattacharyya S, Underhill P, Ottolenghi C, Gadgil M, and
Cavalli-Sforza L (1995) Demographic history of India and mtDNA-sequence
diversity. American Journal ofHwnan Genetics 56:979-992.
Nei M (1972) Genetic Distances Between Populations. American Naturalist 106:283292.
Palanichamy M, Sun C, Agrawal S, Bandelt H-J, Kong Q-P, Khan F, Wang C-Y,
Chaudhur TK, Palla V, and Zhang Y-P (2004) Phylogeny of Mitochondrial DNA
Macrohaplogroup N in India, Based on Complete Sequencing: Implications for
the Peopling of South Asia. American Journal ofHwnan Genetics 75:966-978.
Patil V (1970) Saraswats. The Illustrated Weekly ofindia26:6-19.
Rajkumar R, Banerjee J, Gunturi H, Trivedi R, and Kashyap V (2005) Phylogeny and
antiquity ofM macrohaplogroup inferred from complete mt DNA sequence of
Indian specific lineages. BMC Evolutionary Biology 5:26.
Rajkumar R, and Kashyap V (2004) Genetic structure of four socio-culturally diverse
caste populations of southwest India and their affinity with related Indian and
global groups. BMC Genetics 5:23.

74

Roy S, Thakur C, and Majumder P (2003) Mitochondrial DNA variation in ranked caste
groups of Maharashtra (India) and its implications on genetic relationships and
origins. Annals of Human Biology 30:443-454.
Saillard J, Forster P, Lynnerup N, Bandelt H-J, and Norby S (2000) mtDNA variation
among Greenland Eskimos: the edge of the Beringian expansion. American
Journal of Human Genetics 67:718-726.
Saitou N, and Nei M (1987) The neighbor-joining method: A new method for
recontructing phylogenetic trees. Molecular Biology and Evolution 4:406-425.
Schneider S, Roessli D, and Excoffier L (2000) ARLEQUIN, version 2.0: A software for
population genetic data analysis. Geneva, Switzerland: University of Geneva.
Schurr T, Sukervik R, Starikovskaya Y, and Wallace D (1999) Mitochondrial DNA
diversity in Koryaks and Itel'men: Population replacement in the Okhotsk-Bering
Sea region during the Neolithic. American Journal of Human Genetics I OJ: 1-40.
Schurr T, and Wallace D (2002) Mitochondrial DNA Diversity in Southeast Asian
Populations. Human Biology 74:431-452.
Singh K (2002) People oflndia: introduction national series. Dehli, India:
Anthropological Survey of India-Oxford University Press.
Snell R, ed. (1987) Aspects of the Culture of South Asia. London, UK: School of
Oriental and African Languages, University of London.
Sun C, Kong Q-P, Palanichamy M, Agrawal S, Bandelt H-J, Yao Y-G, Khan F, Zhu C-L,
Chaudhuri T, and Zhang Y-P (2006) The Dazzling Array of Basal Branches in the
mtDNA Macrohaplogroup M from India as Inferred from Complete Genomes.
Molecular Biology and Evolution 23:683-690.
Thangaraj K, Singh L, Reddy A, Rao V, Sehgal S, Underhill P, Pierson M, Frame I, and
Hagelberg E (2003) Genetic Affinities of the Andaman Islanders, A Vanishing
Human Population. Current Biology I 3:86-93.
TIGV (2005) The Indian Genome Variation database (IGVdb): a project overview.
Human Genetics 118: 1-11.

75

