Anthropology Senior Theses

University of Pennsylvania

ScholarlyCommons
Department of Anthropology

Spring 2007

Towards World Citizenship: Ethnography of the World Culture
Initiative and Multicultural Curricula
Elizabeth Leonard
University of Pennsylvania

Follow this and additional works at: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses

Q

Part of the Anthropology Commons

Recommended Citation
Leonard, Elizabeth, "Towards World Citizenship: Ethnography of the World Culture Initiative and
Multicultural Curricula" (2007). Anthropology Senior Theses. Paper 87.

This paper is posted at ScholarlyCommons. https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/87
For more information, please contact repository@pobox.upenn.edu.

Towards World Citizenship: Ethnography of the World Culture Initiative and
Multicultural Curricula
Disciplines
Anthropology

This thesis or dissertation is available at ScholarlyCommons: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/87

TOW ARDS WORLD CITIZENSHIP:
ETHNOGRAPHY OF THE WORLD CULTURE INITIATIVE
AND MULTICULTRURAL CURRICULA
By
Elizabeth Leonard
In
Anthropology
Submitted to the
Department of Anthropology
University of Pennsylvania
Thesis Advisor: Dr. Peggy Sanday
2007

1

Introduction
The World Culture Initiative ("WCI") classroom at University City High School
("UCHS") is an exercise in public interest anthropology and service learning (Sanday and
Janowitz 2004:64 ). The project is in its fourth year of being team taught by Dr. Peggy

Sanday from the University of Pennsylvania ("Penn") and Dr. Karl Janowitz from UCHS.
Each year new groups of students from Penn and UCHS join the professors; the Penn
anthropology students take on the roles of teaching assistants for the anthropology
students from UCHS in an effort to foster global citizenship in the both groups of
students.
The mission of WCI, according to Dr. Sanday, is a means to "impart knowledge
of world cultures to instill in both sets of students a sense of being world citizens."
(Sanday and Janowitz 2004:65). An important element of the WCI is that it is not pure
volunteerism on the part of the Penn students. Rather, it utilizes a service learning
approach that allows the students to grapple with the idea of multiculturalism and
democracy in the real world. In the spirit of ethnography, it is the hope of the co-founders
that the Penn students will understand the other and consequently themselves through this
service-learning project (Sanday and Janowitz 2004:69). This Boasian cultural
anthropological approach allows for meaningful engagement and reciprocity between all
of the students and is important in movement towards understanding world citizenship.
Furthermore, the reciprocity implies that it is also a goal that the high school students
develop a strong sense of self through self-reflection, and an understanding of the other
(Sanday and Janowitz 2004:78).

2

I engaged with the students for eight months, from September 2006 to April 2007,
with the intention of addressing a macro-social goal of equality and quality in education,
with a particular focus on fostering a worldly perspective in the students and myself. The
goal of global citizenship is an impmiant one in its own rite, but my research took me one
step further. The analysis of my field work coupled with an intellectual framework of
theories developed through previous research and scholarship on multicultural education
and cultural plurality attempt to tackle a complex question. What effect will a class that
promotes global citizenship through an anthropological and service learning approach
have on the students? Will the WCI have a positive effect on the self-identity of the
students, could it potentially improve the quality and equality of education for this group
of inner city youth, or will there be other unexpected results? There are many factors to
consider, including the minority and immigrant experience, which includes education and
the realities versus the ideals of American life; understanding of one's identity in the
midst of discrimination and segregation; and finally democracy and citizenship. The
following ethnography is a study of the high school classroom at UCHS coupled with a
comparative analysis to research completed on the topic of multicultural education for
youth.
Methodology & Field Work
Culture at UCHS
Culture is the basic unit of analysis for anthropological research. According to
Stocking culture is, "pluralistic, holistic, non-hierarchical, relativistic, behaviorally
determinist." (Stocking 1996:4). Sanday, founder of WCI suggests that this definition is
derived from Boas' idea of unity in diversity, which implies that humans have the ability

3

to adapt to new situations but there are also a diversity of systems that exist from
adaptation (Sanday and Janowitz 2004:66). The culture with which I engage at UCHS
has aspects of unity in diversity. Within the walls of the school, there is a dominant
attitude that students adopt despite their various personal backgrounds. This attitude is
characterized by a high value placed on humor, apathy towards education, propensity
towards peer conflict, and a certain "ghetto" style of dress. Dr. Janowitz notes that the
potency of these trends is revealed most explicitly when an immigrant student feels that
he or she needs to adopt those patterns. He has watched many transformations in student
behavior, attitude, and style toward these norms. Eight months in the WCI classroom
showed me that the aforementioned attitudes and behaviors are not the complete picture
and merely the result of an incomplete glance at a public culture. There are certainly
deeper layers that exist, an assortment of cultural traditions and personal experiences
combine to make a culture that is more complex than the aforementioned behavioral
trends.
The People and the Environment
I first met the students and their teacher Dr. J anowitz, whom they refer to as
"Doc", at the Museum of Anthropology and Archaeology at the University of
Pennsylvania. The WCI class was there for a field trip to explore the museum and to meet
Dr. Sanday and their new teaching assistants (myself, Liz, and Dylan). At our first
meeting the students were quiet and respectful of the museum and each other. As we
introduced ourselves to each other, we said where we were from. I told the students that I
was born and raised in Philadelphia and I learned that five of the students were also from
Philadelphia. The remaining four students were from Bangladesh, Liberia by way of a

4

refugee camp in Ghana, Burkina Faso, and Sierra Leone. Doc informed me that the
demographics of the class were a rough reflection of the population of UCHS.
Doc can usually be found between his office and his classroom, number 127,
clutching his coffee cup and a binder full of papers. He wears many hats at UCHS. He is
the English as a Second Language ("ESL") coordinator and thus the foreign students
often find their way to his office if they have a free period or any questions about school.
He teaches the WCI class and an ESL geometry class, the latter he claims should not be
taught by him, but no one else is available. At times he seems disillusioned in the
prospect of improvement in UCHS as a whole. In regards to the three WCI students who
are seniors, he worries that they will not get in to any colleges or fail out in the first
semester. At other times, he praises his students for being the best in the school, often
referring to them as "a good group", and admires their persistence towards college. He
treats them as equals; he talks about topics in a frank manner and does not try and protect
students by withholding information from them. He consistently supports in the WCI
because he believes teaching students about the world, each other, and themselves
through the lens of anthropology is an effective method of education. He believes the
benefits are strengthened with the help of reliable Penn service-learners. He wishes that
the successes of the WCI program would be acknowledged by the school. Many students
depend on him, either as a teacher or an advisor, and he is able to remember everyone's
names and their strengths and weaknesses. Students seek him out on a daily basis; we
often had student visitors to the WCI classroom and his office is always occupied by at
least one student. This tells me that he has respect from the students that know him. He
describes his office as a "safe haven" for the foreign students, especially in their first

5

weeks of school. He occasionally complains about his hectic schedule and crowded
office, but his actions tell a different story. He has the best interest of each student in
mind, and I do not think he would have his job be any other way.
I work with three students very closely; "Jack" is a sophomore, African American
who was born and raised in West Philadelphia; "Mary" is a senior, Liberian refugee who
spent her formative years in refugee camps in Ghana; "Lena" is a junior from Bangladesh
who has been in the United States for one year. Jack opened up a great deal over the
course of the year and his assignments became more consistent. Mary remained a diligent
student throughout the course of the year, as did Lena. Since graduation is closer for the
girls, they often spoke about college and their preferred careers, which fluctuated
between lawyer and different medical professions. Mary complimented Lena's ability to
communicate and tutor and suggests that Lena should pursue a career in teaching, but
Lena does not see this as a possibility. She says that her parents remind her often that
careers in law and medicine are desirable and imply success, whereas a career in teaching
would be a waste of their efforts towards her education. Lena agrees with her parents.
Mary does not agree with this point although she also hopes to become a doctor. Both
girls cited their home countries poor health problems as an impetus for pursuing medicine
in the future. The girls are motivated and competitive and they compare grades often. In
the beginning of the year, Jack would nod off in class, and only offered an opinion when
asked. Towards the end, he gave lengthier responses to articles he had read and wrote a
poignant ethnic autobiography. He also interacted with classmates more towards the end
of the term. I was impressed when he allowed Lena and Mary to read his very personal
ethnic autobiography.

6

Beyond my observations I learned about the other students through Doc's
descriptions. Of the Philadelphia born students, "Joe", is a senior and a second generation
Cambodian refugee. Doc immediately informed me that Joe student is having problems at
home; his father is deceased, his mother is an alcoholic, and Joe is often forced to take on
the 'man of the house' role. In September, Doc said that although the school year had
only just started, Joe was absent frequently and the administration had just learned that he
was working illegally at the post office to help pay his family's bills. At our first meeting,
Joe was very quiet and he lingered at pieces in the museum. He seemed interested in the
pieces, but was always alone. Over the course of the academic year, Joe's attendance rose
markedly. His participation in class has increased and Dylan said that he has become
increasingly more inquisitive during the small group discussions of current events.
Although Joe was born in the United States, he currently lives in a neighborhood with
many of other Cambodians and he remains aware of his Cambodian heritage as well as
the history of his family's experience of war and torture in Cambodia. He was absent on
the day that a guest speaker presented on his personal experience with the war in
Cambodia and being a refugee. Doc expected Joe's absence and believed it was
intentional because of difficult family memories.
As frequent guests to University City High School, Dr. Sanday, Liz, Dylan, and I
were permitted to bypass the metal detectors at the main entrance and enter the massive
brick school through the side entrance. At this entrance we were consistently greeted by
the big security guard, Bullock with a jovial "Hello!" Bullock monitors this door to
ensure that students do not leave the building without permission. He is not the only
security guard on duty at UCHS; there are also guards at the front entrance as well as

7

guards that are present in the halls during class changes. The noise in the hallways is
occasionally punctured by the piercing whistle of the roaming security as he attempts to
create order in an otherwise chaotic hallway. The crowds and noise of the hallway are
overwhelming for the visitor, although the activity is usually boisterous and light-hearted
rather than confrontational or threatening.
My short walk from the side entrance ofUCHS to Dr. Janowitz's room quickly
enlightens me to the fact that problems exist in the school. Even when classes are in
session there are often groups of students in the hallways. Sometimes they are laughing,
sometimes they are bickering. On at least two occasions I smelled marijuana wafting
from locked bathroom doors. A peek into the classrooms reveals that the students who
attend class yell to their friends across the room, or to the teacher. Other students roam
the halls during class time. Dr. Janowitz reports that the rate of teacher absences is high
and oftentimes there is not time to find a substitute teacher, leaving the students on their
own with no authority figure to keep them in a class. On a particularly volatile afternoon
I was told to stay in Dr. Janowitz's office with other students who had the period free
because police officers were doing a sweep of the building due to that morning's "riot"
and the previous days' arrest on school premises. The violence at UCHS is beyond my
scope of research, but it is significant nonetheless. One of the African immigrants in the
WCI class, "Chris", was hospitalized after he was attacked by American boys last year.
Dr. J anowitz said that there is tension between some of the American students and some
of the immigrant students which usually manifests itself in teasing but sometimes
violence, as in Chris's case. There is a note of sadness and fear in Dr. Janowitz's eyes and
tone when he informs me of these violent events. It is impossible for me to know the

8

instigators or their motives, but the obvious cultural difference between the students
stands out to me. One of the benefits of world citizenship is to know how to interact with
those who are perceived as different. Learning about the other and understanding one's
identity with the concept of world citizenship can help to transform the school's trends
from cultural clashes towards cultural pluralism.
The chaos of the halls and the constant din from surrounding classrooms is an
acknowledged reality for the students in the WCI class, but they express frustration in
this fact regularly. The most notable example of their frustration in their hectic
surroundings occurred when a fellow student was sharing his personal experiences of war
in his home country of Sierra Leone. Without hesitation, one of the more outspoken
students stood from his chair, expressed disgust with the noise of the neighboring
classroom, and dragged his desk closer to the storyteller. An informal interview with a
group of WCI students confirmed my observations that the students are frustrated by
what they encounter everyday at UCHS. There is an "out of control and wild"
characteristic to the halls and to the classes. They also report that there is disrespect for
the teachers and apathy towards the pursuit of learning. They simultaneously feel that
they did not have the ability to change this custom on a large scale. This latter
interpretation is taken from their desire to go with the flow at school, because "being an
outcast is trouble" and "there is pressure to be the same". The pressure to be the same that
the students feel is manifest in two ways. Primarily, all the students it placed them in an
ongoing "crazy system" of disrespect for learning at UCHS. Secondly, the immigrant
students feel the ethnocentric pull to "assimilate ... because being different in this school
is bad". Dr. Janowitz comments that within a few weeks foreign students adopt the

9

American "thug" variation of the school's uniform even if they were still struggling to
speak English.
There are nuances within this assimilation mindset, as Gibson (Gibson 1993:125 126) suggests. Lena values her own autonomy and believes that she can glean the
positive aspects from her high school's culture and disregard others in order to be the
person she wishes to be. Many students agree with the view of personal agency even if
altering the whole system was not feasible or desirable. Will offers an alternate
interpretation, which implies his ongoing struggle to understand his place within the
system. Will feels pressure; not only can he not change the system but he cannot alter his
role within the framework. He is American born and lives with his grandmother and has
limited interaction with his parents. He openly admits to distancing himself from his
American friends to spend more time with his international friends. He said that he was
not completely trapped in the "thug" culture, which was pervasive at least in attire
amongst his peers. Finally, he reflects on the fact that he had not thought about the idea
of race and ethnicity in terms of difference before this year in school. Despite his
conscious decisions, he sees himself as part of the collective and felt that concluded that
other people had more influence over his life and behavior than he did. Although he is
unsure of his own agency, his is beginning to reflect on his choices and more importantly
his role in the system and with his peers.

It usually takes about five minutes after the 11 :27 start time for all of the students
to arrive and get settled in the WCI class. There is often informal conversation between
students and Doc during this time. Doc can be heard joking with the students, and
sometimes he will have to reprimand students for bickering with each other or request

10

that the students stop talking amongst themselves. The classroom itself is large,
considering the small number of students in the class, and the students choose to spread
out throughout the room. The desks in room 127 are a mixture of different styles and in
no particular order, but they all face the front blackboard and Doc's desk. The blackboard
usually has geometry written on it from the previous class that Doc teaches, and it is not
often used in the WCI classroom because the class focuses on discussion. The room is
covered in maps of the different regions in the world, each with a theme such as rates of
child soldiers in Africa, oil production in the Middle East, or Native American tribes in
pre-European exploration North America. There is also a poster board which features the
Bengali alphabet that was completed by one of the students from Bangladesh. The back
wall of the class is a temporary partition rather than a permanent wall, and it allows the
noise from the adjacent classroom to carry into the WCI room. Maybe because of the
smaller number of students or maybe it is because the students are the best in their
classes, but for whatever reason, the WCI classroom is significantly quieter than the
adjacent room. The main color scheme in the room is beige which makes everything in
the room look worn out; the furniture looks old and there are out of date textbooks stored
in piles on the edges of the room.
Methodology

I attended the WCI classroom, which is called simply "anthropology class" by the
students, twice a week on average. I spent around one hour with the students in class. My
main method was participant observation, followed by note-taking off of the school
premises. Occasionally, I stayed longer to speak with Dr. Janowitz or the students. These
post-class time discussions involved informal conversations about the state of the school

11

or the state of his individual students and classes. It was during these discussions that I
learned about the state of school beyond the WCI classroom. All of the students were
required to write ethnic autobiographies and three of the students wrote responses to the
course; these writing samples served as additional insight into the UCHS students'
reaction to the course.
My time in the classroom was spent in a variety of ways, but I was always active
with the students rather than a passive observer. I experimented with taking notes during
the class, but realized the students became inquisitive about my note taking and I could
sense that they did not appreciate feeling like an object of my study. The UCHS students
from the WCI's pilot year also voiced the concern of being considered "lab rats" (Sanday
and Janowitz 2004:73) so I made an effort to avoid giving them the wrong impression. I
reserved note-taking time for after WCI sessions. It was initially a challenge to earn the
trust of the UCHS students, because they questioned my motives for being there since I
was also receiving credit for my attendance at WCI. By December 2006, this issue was
forgotten and the Penn and UCHS students became comfortable with the mutual
relationship that had been established. There was mutual consent between myself and the
students at UCHS that we were both able to benefit from our meetings.
My role in the classroom was officially referred to as a teaching assistant. I gave
two infonnal presentations on topics on which I had significant knowledge. On most days
we worked in small groups to discuss current events based on articles from Newsweek
and the anthropological content of the course. During the sessions the students would
relate the discussion topics to their own lives, almost instinctively. From September to
December, the course was team taught by Dr. Janowitz and Dr. Sanday and focused

12

heavily on anthropological concepts from their university level textbook, Cultural

Anthropology by Conrad Phillip Kottack. There were also occasional presentations on
specific cultures and their practices. The focus and structure of the course shifted between
semesters. Primarily, the second semester was only taught by Dr. Janowitz, Secondly, the
composition of ethnic autobiographies and the Newsweek discussions dominated the first
two months of 2007. The ethnic autobiography writing assignment and the discussions
surrounding it were crucial for the students because it required that they reflect on their
own lives and apply the anthropological concepts that they learned. It was also a
significant writing assignment that proved to be both challenging and rewarding for the
students. This assignment also provided the teaching assistants with a deeper insight to
the lives of the UCHS students.
Many factors need to be addressed to fully tackle the problem of underprivileged
and poor performance schools. The variable which I tackle is multiculturalism. Diversity
exists at UCHS on various levels such as the immediate socio-cultural backgrounds of the
students, and there is both an obsession and suppression of difference. This is not as
paradoxical as it would initially appear. There is tension that surrounds assimilation of
immigrants, and there is a suppression of difference in the halls and in the curriculum in
favor of efforts to create a unified student body. The students acknowledge the dominant
process of ethno-centrism at UCHS; in the halls with peers it is the public culture
previously discussed, and in the classroom there was an emphasis on Afro-centric history
and cultural studies. The efforts in the WCI classroom were meant to utilize the vmiable
of multiculturalism in a more productive way. The reversal of the current process of
suppression of multiculturalism can occur through the individuals' self-reflections so that

13

they would feel comfortable as a world citizen, which will in tum lead to more positive
interactions between peers. Finally, I wondered if this endeavor would cultivate greater
educational performance.
As I observed the unique patterns that developed within the WCI classroom, I
supplemented my field work with more generalized academic research on the topics of
education and in particular multicultural and immigrant education. The field work
allowed me to draw conclusions about the effects of WCI, and the academic research
allowed me to conclude the potential effects of a program should it be implemented
across the board. There are many steps on the way to world citizenship that need to be
considered in a multicultural curriculum. While world citizenship is still the ultimate goal
for the students, I am also interested in the study on how a multicultural curriculum can
be used to reveal the "mosaic of cultures" (Baptiste 1983:296) within the WCI classroom
and possibly beyond the classroom.

Discussion

Immigrant Experience and World Citizenship
Globalization has brought students from many social, cultural, and linguistic
backgrounds together in the WCI classroom and the halls UCHS and yet there can be a
tendency for immigrant students to be pressured to assimilate, or reject practices.
Research suggests that in the school environment immigrant students often deny or
abandon behavior which labels them as culturally different. It is unclear if the students
ascribe to the idea that "we are all American" (Torres 1998:215) by choice or if it is an
institutional idea that pervades UCHS. To return to the Boas idea of unity in diversity,
WCI chooses to reverse this documented trend towards assimilation and allow the

14

following idea of diversity to pervade: "diversity refers to the plurality of identities, and it
is seen as a condition of human existence rather than as the effect of an enunciation of
differences that constitute hierarchies and asymmetries of power" (Scott 1992:14).
The experience for the immigrant students in the classroom goes beyond
academics. Lena, the student from Bangladesh, says that she was initially very nervous
about going to school everyday because American students would laugh at her accent or
her poor English and she felt that she could not confront them or stand up to them. Her
English has improved but she still feels reserved in confronting the so-called bullies.
Instead, she avoids them, but she struggles with this decision too. On the one hand, her
safety and best interest are protected by avoiding those students, but the reality has
become that she fears and avoids most American students, and so she felt her decision
perpetuates the separation of cultural and ethnic groups. Initially she viewed most
American students as "bad", but she has found admirable qualities of America that she
wishes to adopt because if it would aid in realizing her goals of graduating and going to a
good college and having a successful career. Her final outlook on this situation was akin
to Gibson's concept of the immigrant minority's multidimensional approach to education
and acculturation (Gibson 1993: 125 - 126). Immigrants, or voluntary, minorities are
more comfortable with the idea that the acculturation at school that takes place in a
"multidimensional fashion whereby new skills and values are incorporated into the old
culture, transforming but not replacing it" (Gibson 1993:126). Gibson (1993:125 -126)
suggests that the immigrants understanding of schooling is often different from
"involuntary" minorities' understanding of schooling. Involuntary minorities see school
as an institution that is in stark contrast to their culture. To succeed in school they must

15

assimilate fully to the school's mainstream culture. In an attempt to instill the concept of
world citizenship, it will be important to reinforce Gibson's latter multidimensional
approach to evolve students' identity through education. Lena is not the only one in the
WCI class whom is attempting to navigate her way through two seemingly different
cultures, Bengali and American.
Mary is from Liberia by way of a refugee camp in Ghana and she consistently
says that she is lucky because of the opportunity she has in America. She seems deeply
entrenched in the American dream as she spoke about the wealth of opportunity
compared to Ghana (where she did most of her schooling). It is interesting to me that
both girls see a rough reality around them every day, one of poverty and the threat of
bullying and even more dangerous violence, and yet they are so hopeful in the promises
of American opportunity. They are able to selectively choose which parts of America
they believe were real rather than ideal hopes (college and illustrious careers) and which
they believed to be avoidable (poverty and ignorance). Torres speaks of the need to
recognize the limits of American ideals and the need to teach the realities which
challenge the individual and groups from reaching those ideals. It must be realized that
America has a rather unique problem; new and old citizens believe in American ideals
and the ability for individuals succeed against all odds. This hope can sometimes bring
results, but oftentimes the reality of American Ii ves is very different. According to T01Tes
1998:, "in a democratic curriculum, students need to be taught about and have
opportunities to acquire American democratic values while at the same time learning
about American realities that challenge these ideals, such as discrimination based on race,
gender, and social class." (Torres 1998: 182). He suggests that an open dialogue on the

16

aforementioned issues and personal and group reflection can bridge the gaps between
ideals and realities and lead to his form of multicultural education's ultimate goal, which
is social reform and engagement between cultures. In the WCI classroom it is important
to ensure that foreign students did not merely assimilate to the ideals of American
culture, because the realities are often very different. The realities persist every day, but it
seems that the foreign students felt that the harsh realities did not always apply to them.
The status of immigrant allows them to feel distanced from what they do not see as
helpful on the road to their dreams.
An unconstructive effect of assimilation that the WCI attempts to reverse is the
potential for immigrants to feel pressured to lose their old identity and assimilate to an
unfamiliar and perhaps negative culture. Some potentially detrimental cultures described
before were the public culture of urban high schools or the "culture of truancy" (Furlong
2005:379 - 389). Both of these are transient cultures, which would not affirm the identity
of the immigrant or any student for that matter, because eventually they would feel
unsatisfied with the lack of self-knowledge and the insularity. The forced idea of America
as a melting pot, as described by Baptiste (Baptiste 1983:296), is another ideal that is set
forth that is undesirable and also unattainable. Realities of identity must be accepted and
perpetuated and in dialogue with different identities. The aforementioned ephemeral
cultures are confining and insufficient in affirming one's true identity. It is not a reality to
be able to be a productive citizen if you assimilate to a truant's culture and it is extremely
difficult to assimilate to ideal of the American dream. Therefore, a curriculum that
focuses on reality is more effective, and the reality that persists in WCI is
multiculturalism. It is my hypothesis that the promotion and acceptance of the multitude

17

of cultures and ideas in an open forum would not spread degenerative assimilation; rather
it will foster identity formation and world citizenship to all students.
Globalization has certainly brought changes to the world, but it does not change
the fact that historically, the American educational system has always included
immigrants. At the turn of the century there were great numbers of immigrants from
European nations and the practice was assimilation; students would learn American
customs, values and English within schools (Torres 1998: 179). As new waves of
immigrants arrived in the United States from even more nations throughout the twentieth
century there was a paradigm shift (Gibson 1993:114). No longer was the educational
tactic pure assimilation. Educators began to bring cultural literacy into the classrooms.
There was also an effort to challenge prejudices and ensure that each student had
proficient in basic skills (Torres 1998:181). These methods are problematic for a variety
of reasons. The mission and structure of the WCI implicitly critiques these previous
methods from a long tradition of immigrant education.
Torres (Torres 1998:181) also offers a significant critique. He suggests that
merely teaching about other cultures for students to gain literacy on different cultures is
not enough. Students need to be taught to feel personal cultural pride as well as have
subs tan ti ve knowledge about the cultures both around them and cultures that are
seemingly foreign. Next, it is impossible to breakdown barriers and challenge prejudice
unless students are taught how to interact with other cultures so that students will not
become citizens who only mingle with those who are similar to them (Tmres 1998:181).
Additionally, there should not merely be an effort to make students proficient in basic

18

skills; rather educators must strive towards equity between students and excellence rather
than proficiency (Torres 1998:181).
Understanding Identity and World Citizenship

The current body of work on multicultural education focuses on allowing students
to realize their many levels of identity. In practice, the WCI students were asked to write
and ethnic autobiography so that they could come closer to an understanding of
themselves. Paulo Freire offers the suggestion that, "men relate to their world in a critical
way. They apprehend the objective data of their reality through reflection, not by reflex as do animals." (Freire 1973:3). This idea underpins the assignment to make the students
write such an autobiography. I believe that it is crucial that they relate to their actual
reality because it may be different from their perceived reality.
In theory, teaching pluralism to students at the high school level will make them
secure with their own identity, but also allow them to navigate their way through life and
be able to interact with other cultures and function within various dominant culture
groups. The final step in the identity process is the perception of oneself as a world
citizen, and this can be the ultimate goal of a curriculum which focuses on cultural
pluralism (Torres 1998 see also Baptiste 1983: 296 - 302). Adolescence is an
impressionable time and often a time when people search for their identity; these feelings
are exaggerated when the student is an immigrant or feels like a minority in any situation.
A curriculum that is critically developed towards plurality will facilitate the acceptauce of
ones identity as well as foster a sense of empowerment that is rooted not only in ones
own cultural identity or national identity, but also in their "interculturality and potential
world citizenship" (Golz 2005:8). The quest for understanding ones identity is especially

19

important in a high school setting where many of the students are immigrants. "We know
that the immigrants' loss of status, identity, confusion, generational conflict, language
difficulties, poverty, prejudice, and hostility in the United States work as alien pressures
on the immigrant refugees' state of mind, already beset by the problems of war, hunger,
chaos, danger of escape, and separation from family that they brought to the United
States." (Flaxman 1983:347)
The majority of the student body at UCHS is of African extraction, but within this
general category are students from different neighborhoods in Philadelphia and students
from different nations in Africa. Amongst the African immigrant population there are
many nations, languages, and cultural groups represented, as well as a variety of reasons
for migration to America. The same is true for the immigrants from Southeast Asia
descent or South and Central America. There are students with different religious
backgrounds; Christians and Catholics, Southeast Asian Muslims and African American
Muslims. There are students with different skin tones, students who speak different
languages, and students with different familial situations. One of my perceptions about
the UCHS students was that as minorities in the United States they would be
hypersensitive to the idea of their race as an identity and a source of pride. However, this
was a generalized misconception that I had about the students; in fact many had already
admitted to not labeling themselves to any race. One student was proud to say that on his
college applications he describes himself as "Other - Human". And when asked if she
felt that she had a particular identity, one student said 'Tm a person, no different from
anyone else." These quotes reflect the dominant view in the class; rejection of race
coupled with an assertion of global unity. This was affirmed towards the end of the class

20

when a handful of students confirmed that they would label themselves as world citizens.
However, this was not the only view in the class even at the end. Lena admits that she is
not a world citizen, she will always be Asian and that is her way of understanding her
identity.
Initially I thought that there was disconnect between the students' tendency for
global and school-wide assimilation and their tendency to disregard the label of race.
However the fact that they desire to be understood at their most general level of
existence, their qualification as a human being, shows a reflection of the Boasian belief of
"unity in diversity- unity the human ability to adapt to environmental and historical
contingencies; diversity as represented by the variety of cultural systems that evolved in
the adaptive process" (Sanday and Janowitz 2004:3). Furthermore, in the microcosm of
UCHS, I believe that for some students the acceptance of assimilation is their way of
exerting a desire for school-wide equality. They want their school to be equal to others,
because they recognize it has weaknesses; "I could have gone to another school, and now
I am paying the price", or "we have a disadvantage for college". The students also
reflected that they are not challenged but instead excel without much effort. They fear
that they will face great adversity in the future due to the standards of the world beyond
UCHS. Finally, the students also desire to have equality within the school; for all students
to be recognized as equal human beings. The students recognize that they have a variety
of communities and thus a variety of needs within the school, but ultimately all the
students deserve the same equality in education and justice because they are all human
needs.

21

Adolph Reed suggested that there are no natural alliances between people, based
on skin color or otherwise; a continuum of debate exists on inequalities from which
movements and social change can occur (Reed 1999:50- 51), At its best, WCI is a place
to debate inequalities and bring about social change within the classroom and within the
individual. The students were exposed to the idea that their religion, skin color,
socioeconomic level, or family history did not lock them into one specific and strict
identity. Furthermore, the students did not have natural alliances in the classroom based
on traditional divisions between people, thus reflecting Reed's thesis. With WCI we
hoped to even bridge more connections between students who initially felt there were
seemingly insurmountable lines of difference that could not be blurred. Through
exercises in self reflection as well as external exercises in listening to each others'
personal stories of war, religion, neglect, and cultural knowledge they learned that they
were in fact unified by difference and also by shared emotional and concrete similarities.
The ethnic autobiography assignment gave the students a chance to think
critically about their identity even further. They used Freire's (Freire 1973:3) idea of
reflecting on ones history and current state through the lens of family stories and
genealogies, recurring dreams, reactions to certain people, belief systems, and earliest
memories. For many students, revisiting personal history was uncomfortable and full of
troubling memories; for Jack it meant reliving the beatings he received from stepfathers
and for Chris it meant reliving narrowly escaping the brutal recruitment of child soldiers
by rebel forces. However, by doing this exercise each student's status as an individual as
an individual was affirmed and it allowed them to think critically on why their behavior,
value system, and outlook on life were that way. The students were relatively

22

comfortable with sharing personal histories. This revealed to me that the students had
become comfortable with their fellow students despite initial differences. More
importantly it was a step towards the second stage of world citizenship, which was to
appreciate someone that appears different from oneself.
Democracy and World Citizenship

What effect does cultural education and service learning have on identity, and the
democratic idea of citizenship? According to Sanday the Boasian legacy has a
"theoretical and practical understanding of multiculturalism and its commitment to
problem solving in the interest of building a community-oriented moral order based on
equal rights." (Sanday and Janowitz 2004:65). Paulo Freire also offers important theory
for the intellectual framework towards world citizenship. Freire is a proponent of
empowerment through education, rather than an education that is based simply on
learning facts and recalling them (Torres 1998:218). In this sense, Freire is alluding to the
"politicity of education", that education can be used as a political tool for the educated
and not just the educators. This is in stark contrast to the idea presented by Antonio
Gramsci which suggests that, "educational systems, and schools in particular, appear as
privileged instruments for the socialization of a hegemonic culture." (Torres 1998: 13).
The type of educational system described by Gramsci can be used as a way to maintain
the status quo, and keep the subordinate, less educated, and immature members of society
in those roles. In this paradigm, the educated would be victims of the glass ceiling effect,
in which they can see equality and better social roles, but the system never permits them
to evolve into those roles. Torres (Torres 1998:11) calls this the dilemma of democracy;

23

always reflect on the problems that their students face and attempt to use the strengths of
diversity to shape an effective and relevant curriculum for the students (Jacob 1995: 456
-457)
Conclusions

Activists, researchers, and policymakers alike devote time to understanding
education system in America in order to make the social and academic environment of
schools more conducive to learning. The social and cultural aspects of a school and its
academic curriculum can be dealt with separately, but through participant observation
and academic research it becomes evident that there can be a unique correlation between
the two at any given school.
Without extrapolating too much from my field work or the intellectual
framework, I conclude that the WCI model can be a useful general guide for effective
social studies curricula for the cultivation of world citizenship. That is, the social makeup
and environment of the school should be examined often so that the curriculum can
evolve to meet the needs of the student population. While the basics of high school
curriculums, including mathematics, hard sciences, and literature should not be
sacrificed, the curricula for courses which fall under the general heading of social studies
should be re-considered often. The laws of physics remain stable and classic works of
literature have a timeless quality, yet the world and its politics and societies are
constantly changing, and so should outdated curricula.
The World Culture Initiative is a particularly salient example of a progressive
high school social science course. The social climate at University City High School is
made up of a largely African American student population, but it had significant

32

Difference will continued to be recognized, but it will have different connotations. The
idea of cultural pluralism was spearheaded by Horace Kallan as the ideal of what
American society should be, a veritable "mosaic of cultures". All groups of people would
assimilate only to the idea of a pluralistic American culture, where they can maintain a
personal identity and coexist with others that do the same (Baptiste 1983:296).
A curriculum and social environment of a school must also be adapted towards
students' motivations. Competition is one institutional norm that is pervasive in high
schools; however school and succeeding in school can mean different things to different
students (Jacob 1995:451-457). This is certainly clear in the WCI classroom; some
students value receiving the highest grade, others want to be friends with the teacher,
some have pure intellectual pursuits and are not overly concerned with grades, others
want to bide their time until graduation and free time to make money, others would like
to be the class clown or even the bully to gain respect or fear from peers. A challenging
type of motivation to tackle is the one that inspires students to be "cool" rather than
"clever", to be more focused on popularity and reputation within a peer group that with
academics (Williamson 2004:26 - 28). While students in the WCI believe the curriculum
has had an effect on their outlook towards peers that are different, they are unsure if those
motivated by reputation would retain any of the lessons learned in the anthropological
cmTiculum. While the literature suggests many ideal situations for multicultural curricula,
the realities of American life must once again be acknowledged. This lack of academic
motivation is one problem, and when it is coupled with a low socioeconomic status, a
student will not leave high school on equal footing as his or her peers. Ideals cannot be
forced when the reality is much different, therefore teachers and administrators must

31

minorities of non-African Americans and immigrant students from around the globe,
most notably from Africa, South Asia, and Latin America. As the various cultures
interacted with each other there is a heightened opportunity for tension and
discrimination based on skin color, religion, language, and behavior in addition to the
normal tensions between high school students; such conflicts occur at UCHS. The World
Culture Initiative aimed to foster a desire towards world citizenship and replace the
aforementioned tension with productive and pluralistic interaction between students as
well as cultural self-respect.
Research suggests that the problems of lack of self-reflection and self-knowledge
coupled with little interethnic communication are a result of adolescents not having a
"place of gathering" (Caunenko and Gasper 2005:36) in which they feel comfortable
engaging in such dialogues. A school can serve this purpose, and the WCI provides a
means to do so. A school is an interesting type of culture, because it is a forced
association between people. The combinations of cultures that join to form the school
culture of UCHS imply that multiculturalism exists at UCHS. For this very reason,
UCHS and its students will benefit from a school-wide multicultural curriculum.
Engagement with such a curriculum will teach the students about themselves, their peers,
and the environment they are forced to be in every day.

33

Baptiste, H. Prentice Jr.
1983 Internalizing the Concept of Multiculturalism In Perspectives in Immigrant and
Minority Education. Ronald J. Samuda and Sandra L. Woods, eds. Pp. 294308Lanham: University Press of America.
Caunenki, Irina. I.,and Lucia Gasper
2005 The Formation of Ethnic Youth Identities and the Problem of Tolerance In
Internationalization, Cultural Difference and Migration. Reinhold Golz, ed. Pp. 35
- 40 New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers.
Flaxman, Erwin
1983 Information Resources in the Education of Ethnic Immigrants: Some Lessons
from the Past In Perspectives in Immigrant and Minority Education. Ronald J.
Samuda and Sandra L. Woods, eds. Pp. 341- 350. Lanham: University Press of
America.
Freire, Paulo
2000 Pedagogy of the Oppressed. 30 th Anniversary Edition. New York: Continuum
Freire, Paulo
1973 Education for Critical Consciousness. New York: Continuum Publishing Group.
Furlong, Andy
2005 Cultural Dimensions of Decisions about Educational Participation among 14 to
19 Year Olds: the Parts That Tomlinson Doesn't Reach. Joumal of Education
Policy 20(3):379 - 389.
Gibson, Margaret
1993 The School Performance of Immigrant Minorities: A Comparative View In
Minority Education: Anthropological Perspectives. Evelyn Jacob and Cathie
Jordon, eds. Pp. 113 - 128. Norwood: Ablex Publishing Corp.
Golz, Reinhard, ed.
2005 Introduction: Educational Transformations without the Considerations of
International Expe1ience Seldom Last In Internationalization, Cultural Difference
and Migration. Pp. 7 - 9. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers.
Hourihan, John, and Dexter Chapin
1976 Multicultural Education in a Pluralistic Society. Anthropology and Education
Quarterly 7(4):23 - 26.
Jackson, John
2005 Real Black: Adventures in Racial Sincerity. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

34

Jacob, Evelyn.
1995 Reflective Practice and Anthropology in Culturally Diverse Classrooms.
Elementary School Journal 95(5):451-464.
Nieto, Sonia
nd
1996. Affirming Diversity: The Sociopolitical Context of Multicultural Education. 2
edition. New York: Longmans.
Reed, Adolph
1999 Stirrings in the Jug: Black Politics in the Post-Segregation Era, Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Sanday, Peggy Reeves, and Karl Janowitz.
2004 Public Interest Anthropology: A Boasian Service-Leaming Initiative. Michigan
Journal of Community Service Learning 10(3):64 - 75.
Stocking, G.W.
1999 Volksgeist as Method and Ethic: Essays on Boasian Ethnography and the
German Anthropologist Tradition. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
ToJTes, Carlos Alberto.
1998 Democracy, Education, and Multiculturalism: Dilemmas of Citizenship in a
Global World. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers Inc.
Williamson, Howard.
2004 The Milltown Boys Revisited. Oxford: Berg Publishers.

35

