Anthropology Senior Theses

University of Pennsylvania

ScholarlyCommons
Department of Anthropology

Spring 2007

West Harlem on Their Minds: Mapping Power, Identity and
Inclusion in a Changing Neighborhood
Shakirah Simley
University of Pennsylvania

Follow this and additional works at: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses

Q

Part of the Anthropology Commons

Recommended Citation
Simley, Shakirah, "West Harlem on Their Minds: Mapping Power, Identity and Inclusion in a Changing
Neighborhood" (2007). Anthropology Senior Theses. Paper 80.

This paper is posted at ScholarlyCommons. https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/80
For more information, please contact repository@pobox.upenn.edu.

West Harlem on Their Minds: Mapping Power, Identity and Inclusion in a
Changing Neighborhood
Disciplines
Anthropology

This thesis or dissertation is available at ScholarlyCommons: https://repository.upenn.edu/anthro_seniortheses/80

West Harlem on Their Minds:
Mapping Power, Identity and Inclusion in a
Changing Neighborhood
By

Shakirah Simley
In

Anthropology
Submitted to the
Department of Anthropology
University of Pennsylvania
Thesis Advisor: Dr. Paula Sabloff

2007

Introduction
In junior high school, the Upper West Side was miles away from Harlem. Armed
with our bright green and white Metrocards, the subway would whisk my best friend and
me far away from gourmet supermarkets carrying cheeses with names we could not
pronounce and the private school where we donned sky blue knee-length skirts and navy
blue pullovers that set our parents back every year. Far from the keep out-tall iron gates
of Columbia University, police officers that scolded us for jaywalking and gleaming,
well-kept white sidewalks and away from towering buildings with elegant glass doors
and uniformed doormen. The #3 train was our exit from this world and a "magic act"
always accompanied our trip home; our fellow white straphangers would unfailingly
th

th

disappear by the 110 Street stop. We continued toward 145 Street station, exit onto
Lenox Avenue and head west, where the sights, smells and sounds of the Harlem we
knew enveloped us. Up hilly sidewalks scarred with blackened gum, we passed African
hair braiding shops and tiny bodegas blasting bachata music. Passing multiple storefront
churches with weathered signs and the orange neon signs of massive Laundromats.
Beyond five-story walk-ups with deteriorated facades that signal past grandeur, next to
meticulously maintained 19th century brownstone row homes.
Now, boundaries have blurred. Trends in the real estate market and new
development opportunities have reached "uptown", rapidly transforming a neighborhood
formerly marked by retail and residential disinvestment. Gentrification in Harlem has
been on the minds and lips of everyone, from residents to politicians, university
administrators to New York Times reporters, activists to developers, and business owners

to the blogosphere. The controversial nature and social relevance of this neighborhood
change lies in the renewal of community outrage and subsequent action on the issue.
My interest in this topic stems from my unique position as a Harlem resident.
Over the past two decades, I have witnessed neighborhood characteristics of the Upper
West Side have making their way further uptown. Harlem is the new frontier for
residential and commercial retail development; suburban-style mainstream brands such as
Old Navy, Starbucks and Staples are juxtaposed against local and culturally specific
establishments such as M&G Soul Food Diner, Lenox Lounge and African Paradise, an
import shop. After years of palpable absence, banks and chain drugstores sit on the
ground floor of newly built luxury condominiums. Residents can now sip mocha lattes at
a new Starbucks, now opening the corner of 145 th and 8th avenue. Between 2003 and
2006, housing prices in West Harlem rose by more than I 00%, and refurbished town
homes boasting fireplaces, pocket doors and hardwood floors regularly sell for millions.
The self-described "destination for the discerning" gourmet supermarket, Citarella
th

recently opened its doors on !25 Street and Amsterdam, complete with an extensive Joie
gras and truffle selection. "For sale" signs are ubiquitous and dumpsters brimming with

the waste ofrestoration projects dot tree-lined blocks. These changes have heralded, as
some say, a 'nouveau renaissance' in the neighborhood or, as highlighted by a recent
New York Times article, a great way to spend a weekend 'uptown':
Today's Harlem simmers with -ations: gentrification, commercialization and real
estate speculation -- causing tension and political battles. But all that change
makes this a fascinating time for a Harlem weekend of early morning church
services, midday chicken and waffles, afternoon shopping, evening bar-hopping
and late-night jazz. You can even talce the A Train to get there.

However, through my ethnographic research with native residents and my own
experiences, the vastly changing landscape has ushered in more mixed reviews. On one
end, I directly benefit from the building of restaurants, new shopping options,
supermarkets and entertainment venues resulting from recent redevelopment measures.
At the other end, my family's standard ofliving signals the opposite. Due to the real
estate market explosion, West Harlem property values have risen tremendously, as have
rents and the cost of living. Such change makes it difficult for residents to occupy or
even feel comfortable in their neighborhoods. Examining my role in this situation has
motivated me to critically analyze my surrounding environment, but also learn about the
ways in which my neighbors feel emotionally and culturally challenged by neighborhood
change.
This research explores the dynamic relationship between race, place and power in
an urban community in flux; examining the ways in which community members frame
and define neighborhood change in West Harlem, and paying close attention to issues of
power, identity and inclusion. Several theoretical queries guided my research, as I sought
to gauge the issues at hand through a humanistic and interpretive model. To determine
the attitudes, perceptions and behaviors the native residents held toward their
transforming neighborhood, I examined how their observations related to themes of place
attachment, inclusion and power. In light of a swift reversal of years of disinvestment and
relative isolation, suspicions and distrust simmer among long-time residents. Class and
race tensions fuel fears of out-pricing and displacement, giving rise to power struggles
and debates over ownership of space and authenticity. Further, new interests and
expectations often compete with established values and norms. These concerns and

conflicts, exacerbated by a housing crisis and Columbia University's plan to expand into
West Harlem, can potentially have a volatile effect. Through contentious community
meetings, conversations over meals and interviews with individuals in their homes and
workplaces, I listened to the range of emotions expressed by residents. Feelings of anger,
frustration, and resignation but also, indignation, resolve and resistance characterized
these exchanges. Further insight into how these feelings and concerns construct residents'
reaction (and action) toward neighborhood change will be discussed later on.
I also questioned how neighborhood change affected one's place-identity,
assessing how native residents see themselves in light of a series of physical and social
transformations within their community. Essentially, if our identity is shaped by our
physical environment and the social relationships within those physical spaces, what
happens to our sense of self and community when that physical environment changes?
Lastly, I challenged my own assumptions on the cultural effects of neighborhood change.
Through my fieldwork and participant observation, I began to wonder whether it was
responsible and relevant to frame the complexity of gentrification solely along racial lines
and within the binary construction of "insider vs. "outsider". Although recent literature
frames the process of gentrification in Harlem as a "black vs. white" issue, this model,
while appropriate for Central Harlem, is not entirely adequate for West Harlem. The
community is self-described by residents as a "neighborhood of neighborhoods" with a
diverse native-born and immigrant population. Remaining cognizant of this significant
difference, I hypothesized that this fixed binary ignores complexities in which diverse
groups experience neighborhood change in different ways. Although I do not wish to
ignore the social history of a neighborhood delineated as an isolated, "racialized" space,

and specifically a Black space, I intend to problematize popular racial presumptions when
issues of class and the experiences of neglected minority groups are increasingly central
to the discussion of gentrification in Harlem.
The intricacies and challenges presented by neighborhood change is an
impediment to illustrating a complete portrait of West Harlem. Through the eyes and
words of my neighbors, I attempt to provide a brief snapshot of community responses and
reactions with the hope that future anthropological study can build upon these findings.

From 'Genteel', to 'Ghettoization' to Gentrification: A Brief Look through History
"Harlem always remained a strange combination of the old and new. "
-Osofsky, 1971
"West Harlem is a neighborhood of neighborhoods ... this community has always been a transitory
accumulation of many different communities which has made it, in the words of [15 th
Congressional District representative] Charles B. Rangel, a "no man's land".
I am sitting in the office of Jordi Reyes-Montblanc, a Cuban-born, 40-year
resident of West Harlem and the Chairman of Community Board 9 Manhattan (CB9M).
CB9M is a city-sanctioned advisory group in charge of assessing and ensuring the quality
life of the neighborhood. Chairman Reyes-Montblanc's office is really a comer cubicle
with gray wall enclosures, complete with stacks of papers and manila folders precariously
perched upon a wooden desk. He swivels in his office chair from his desktop computer
and turns to me; over his shoulder, I catch a glimpse of his very full email inbox and take
note that Chairman Reyes-Montblanc is a very busy man. Although I try to distinguish
myself from Columbia Spectator reporters, I sense a bit of interview fatigue and decide to
that the general board meeting in twenty minutes is a good networking opportunity to
find other neighborhood informants. After a brief pause, he continues.

"In the last few years there has been many avenues of communications open between the
different communities co-existing within our borders. However, no single identity, culture, or
attachment exists; it varies within each of the many communities, whether English-speaking or
Spanish-speaking. This is what makes this area [one] of interest to study. As a neighborhood
[however], we are extremely diverse, but we have no integration compared to Central Harlem,
which has cultural, racial and spiritual cohesion."
The Chairman's comments pique my interest, as the two neighborhoods (Central
and West Harlem) "within a neighborhood" (Harlem) maintain a seemingly divergent
present, but share a rich social history. Between Harlem's past as a haven for landed
gentry and feared future as a haven for gentrifiers, emerges an interesting saga that
shapes present-day race and class relations.

In 1658, Dutch Governor Peter Stuyvesant established "Nieuw Haarlem" on the
banks of the East River at present day, East !25 th Street. The year 1664 brought English
victory over the Dutch for Manhattan, and the newcomers anglicized the rural area with a
new name: "Harlem". During the colonial period, several of America's wealthiest
families, such as the Delanceys, Beekmans, Bleekers, Rikers, Coldens and Hamiltons,
enjoyed abundant crop yields with expansive country estates in Harlem (Osofsky, 72).
For two hundred years, the area remained the country retreat of a self-governing genteel
community, as a growing metropolis below its borders exploded with the onset of an
urban revolution. However, by the 1830' s, property values dropped as the once fecund
soil gave out due to centuries of farming. The exodus of wealthy estate-owners brought
an influx of impoverished Irish immigrants into Harlem's marshlands and infertile lands.
After years of isolation, in 1837, the New York and Harlem Railroad connected the
deteriorating suburb to the rest of the city. Over the next 40 years, New York City's
growing population influenced Harlem's expansion, as older residents sought uptown

living to avoid new immigrants. The arrival of elevated subways to the neighborhood
complemented the rampant development of blocks of tenements, as well as luxurious
brownstones and fashionable apartment complexes. The real estate boom brought the
assumption that Harlem "would develop into an exclusive, stable, upper- and uppermiddle-class community: a neighborhood very genteel" (Osofsky 77), intended for
wealthier white New Yorkers. Those who migrated from downtown at this time included
recent immigrants from Great Britain and Germany. Speculators anticipating the pending
Lenox and Lexington Avenue routes and subsequent increases in property values bought
undeveloped lands; these ventures led to a sizeable escalation in the cost of housing and
land, specifically in West Harlem (Osofsky 90). However, widespread high hopes
ultimately came crashing down in 1904.
The speculative boom led to a speculative burst for the first part of the twentieth
century, as expectant entrepreneurs overestimated the demand for housing and the
completion date of the subway lines. The drop in real estate prices briefly attracted a
large population of Eastern European Jews to the west and the arrival of Italians
immigrants to the east, in present day Spanish Harlem. Moreover, rather than face
bankruptcy, landlords began to rent properties to blacks, collecting a lucrative return on
higher rents that African Americans were often forced to pay. The crumbling real estate
market offered a money-making window of opportunity for African-American realty
companies and individuals such as Philip A. Payton, Jr.. Seizing the opportunity, Payton
acquired five-year leases on white-owned properties, managed them, and rented them to
blacks at ten percent above the deflated market price (Osofsky 93 ). These profitable
initiatives facilitated the migration of middle-class families, newly arrived black

southerners and immigrants from the West Indies to Harlem. The real estate climate also
attracted native New Yorkers facing displacement from the building of Pennsylvania
Station from 1906 to 1910, mainly from segregated sections of the city; these residents
inhabited the area west of Herald and Time Squares, from the West 20s to the 60s,
comprising the overcrowded areas known as Hell's Kitchen, the Tenderloin, and San Juan
Hill. Consequently, the refusal of realtors elsewhere to rent to blacks, the fear of rioting
in segregated, overcrowded neighborhoods in Lower Manhattan, and the lure of available
housing options brought a significant increase of blacks to the neighborhood. Fortunately,
this change in the housing market offered, for the first time, decent, attractive housing in
large quantities to a segment of New York's population, which had never had such an
opportunity (Taylor 5). The demographic shift quickly swept the neighborhood, much to
the chagrin and fear of white residents. At first, these tenants resisted the "Negro
invasion". Yet, the shrewd practices of white property owners and the Afro-American
Realty Company played upon the fears and prejudices of white tenants, ultimately
allowing for the white exodus of the early 1900s (Taylor 5). By 1920, 73,000 blacks,
two-thirds of Manhattan's population at that time, occupied Harlem (Vietorisz and
Harrison 5).
Although the lure of Harlem brought blacks readily to the neighborhood, low
wages and de facto segregation constrained the new residents to the area. Moreover, it
was often difficult to cover the high cost of living and find suitable employment to meet
one's needs; according estimations of a 1927 report by the Urban League, Vietorisz and
Harrison note that blacks in Harlem paid as much as half their income in rent. Not all
fared badly, however. Elite Harlemites had a taste of the "sweet life" on Sugar Hill,

located between 145 th Street to 155th Street, between Amsterdam and Edgecombe
Avenues. Here, wealthy blacks enjoyed amenities in "high style" with broad tree-lined
streets, elevators, telephone service and spacious homes.
Eventually, the high cost ofliving in the community, increased demands on
brought by an ever-rising population and sheer density of the neighborhood led to
physical deterioration and unsanitary health conditions. Landlords often left buildings in
deep disrepair and neglected to provide services to tenants, but continued to charge
increasingly high rents. This practice continued well into mid-century, giving rise to
periods of civil conflicts and myriad health problems. In light of these difficulties for
residents, churches began to play an increasingly important role in the institutional
development of Harlem; traditionally, churches have been the most stable and wealthy
institutions within the black community and many began to invest in land in Harlem to
cater to their congregations (Osofsky 113). Churches, such as the Abyssinian Baptist
Church, Bethel African Methodist Episcopal, Bethel African Methodist Episcopal Zion
and St. Philip's Protestant Episcopal Church provided a platform for black political and
cultural life and facilitated the delivery of social services. This sentiment still holds true
today as black churches, such as the Abyssinian Development Corporation, are involved
in financing affordable housing options and encouraging the growth of small businesses.
Other important black institutions also relocated to Harlem, opening their doors uptown
to better serve their community. These organizations included black chapters of the
YMCA and YWCA, the NAACP, the Urban League, and black newspapers, The
Amsterdam News and the New York Age.

The post-World War I period heralded 'The Harlem Renaissance", a literary
phenomenon that solidified Harlem's place as the black cultural capital of the world.
Romanticized as Harlem's 'golden age', the period spurred an unprecedented explosion
of art, music and literature, as well as the development of black political thought.
However, beyond the glitz and glamour of famed jazz clubs, theaters and dance halls,
several major urban developments spurred the neighborhood's emergence as a slum. As
neighboring districts below Harlem's borders effectively excluded the growing Black
population through discriminatory practices, Harlemites could not escape inflated rental
prices. For instance, during this time, a typical white working class family in New York
paid $6.67 per month per room, while black families in Harlem paid $9.50 for the same
room (Osofsky 136). A combination of low wages, exorbitant housing prices and
residential overcrowding led to the neighborhood's 'ghettoization'. The deteriorating
dwellings in Harlem continued to receive only negligible maintenance and repairs. This
malicious cycle began during the Depression and continued for decades as the housing
stock in the neighborhood rapidly worsened; property owners abandoned many buildings
when the price of rehabilitation and city housing codes compliance became costly.
Subsequently, the 1950's and 1960's saw an exodus of the black middle class and an
increase in the mass concentration of black urban poor. Harlem was not exempt from the
slum clearance and urban renewal projects spearheaded by Robert Moses, as other lowincome communities in New York City at that time. With the exception of local nonprofit development corporations seeking to spur revitalization through the building lowincome housing with goverument loans, retail and residential investment was few and far
in between. Although the rhetoric of the black power movement spoke to the urban poor

in Harlem during this time, the destabilization of the neighborhood due to unemployment,
crumbling social networks, and inadequate resources and public services ultimately left
those who remained behind, disempowered and left to fend for themselves.
The 'black middle-class flight' trend persisted in the l 970's, supplemented by
continued widespread disinvestment by landlords (Gothelf2004) and worsened by New
York's financial crisis in general. The economic recession of the late 1980's and early
1990s hit the community even harder, exacerbated by a crack epidemic that gripped New
York's poorest, minority neighborhoods. By the late 1980s, the City of New York owned
65% of the buildings in Harlem (Gothelf2004). These vacant units often harbored illegal
drug activity, and many buildings succumbed to abandonment or arson. By the early
1990s, the community, subjected to depopulation, devalorization ofland, a weakened tax
base and the visual scarring of abandoned, burned out homes, had truly seen the worst.
Prompted by external and internal pressures over the past fifteen years, Harlem
has undergone major economic restructuring. Several mechanisms served as the catalyst
for neighborhood change in Harlem. In a national context, the growing prominence of
urban living prompted by artists, the highly educated and the upwardly mobile spurred a
"back-to-the-city" movement. By the early 1990s, a reverse migration into metropolitan
areas, while stimulating of revival of America's urban centers, placed immense strains on
the cost of living in low-income neighborhoods with highly desirable qualities such
proximity to city center and attractive architecture (Smith 67). Secondly, on a local level,
aggressive police tactics, increased police presence and the introduction of a federal, cityfunded empowerment zone 1 to spur revitalization and private investment through public

1

The mission of the Upper Manhattan Empowerment Zone(UMEZ), established in 1996, "is to sustain the
economic revitalization of all communities in Upper Manhattan through job creation, corporate alliances,

funds and tax incentives are both significant factors. Additionally, the availability of
architecturally distinctive "fixer uppers", buildings that developers can buy, rehabilitate
cheaply and sell profitably, as well as pressures from real estate markets and lack of
affordable housing below Harlem's borders contributed to community's transformation.
It is significant to note that these forces in tandem did not occur by chance or by
"natural" market forces. In his seminal book, The New Urban Frontier, Neil Smith
provides a more plausible explanation:
Here we come back to the relationship between production and consumption, for
the empirical evidence suggest that more often than not, the process is initiated
not by the exercise of those individual consumer preference much beloved of
neoclassical economists, but by some form of collective social action at the
neighborhood level. The state, for example, initiated much of the early
gentrification in the US as a continuation of urban renewal projects, and though it
plays a lesser role today, state subsidies and sponsorship of gentrification remain
important. More commonly today, with private market-gentrification, one or more
financial institutions will reverse a long-standing redlining policy and actively
target a neighborhood as a potential market for construction loans and mortgages.
(Smith, 68)
Smith's theory certainly holds true for Harlem as financial institutions that previously
redlined the neighborhood now provided conventional mortgages to incoming
homebuyers. For instance, between 1991 and 2001, data from Home Mortgage
Disclosure Act demonstrates that number of conventional mortgage loans underwritten in
Harlem increased by 1,400 percent (Freeman, 30). Such rapid development within a
community with a specific socio-political history informed by years of relative
disinvestment and strong sense of racial identity stirs native residents' concerns as to
what type of new change or development the next month, year or decade will bring.

strategic investments and small business assistance" through the help of$85 million of direct capital and
$212 million of tax-exempt empowerment zone facility bonds.

In a PBS online documentary on gentrification entitled "Flag Wars", author and
urbanist Benjamin Grant explains that change is a constant feature of urban living.
However, Grant also notes that change (i.e. gentrification) in urban enviromnents always
involves winners and losers and that "low-income people are rarely the winners". While
the process of gentrification varies by city and neighborhood, Grant calls on residents,
community development corporations, and city governments struggling with inevitable
change "to create a win-win situation for everyone involved". Thus, while neighborhood
change in Harlem is inescapable, all parties involved must ensure that the trend of social
and economic restructuring does not come at the expense and exclusion oflow-income
and native residents. As Dorothy Pitman Hughes, Harlem businesswoman and activist
declares in her autobiography and critique of UMEZ:

The Empowerment Zone's admitted philosophy of"empowering" our people is to
bring in large corporations to create jobs, while our philosophy is support
ownership in the community to create wealth, security and a strong social culture.
As jobs are very much needed, you can see how their philosophy may be
attractive to people, but at what price? Gentrification so often looks attractive. It
promises clean, well-lit, well-kept streets. It promises a daily visage of people
walking to and from work and people shopping, etc.,--- instead of hanging out on
comers with no place to go. Can we conceive of a Harlem which looks and feels
as I have described without gentrification? Without the creation of a permanent
underclass of poor workers, criminal and homeless, hopeless souls? (Huges, 51)

West Harlem, Demographics and Dimensions: An Overview
According to data for 2000, West Harlem is home to approximately 111,700 people;
its population is steadily increasing over the past two decades. Although the

neighborhood has wealthier subsections, according to CB9M estimations, the average
income is $32,918 and the unemployment rate is about 18%; the former is lower than that
of the NYC income average and the latter is one of higher rates of unemployment in the
city. About 40% of the population has received some form of public assistance. The area
is very diverse, about 43 percent Latino, 31 percent black, 18 percent non-Latino white
and 5 percent Asian Pacific Islander. The neighborhood has a large Latino presence, and
unlike East Harlem, residents are of mostly of Dominican, Ecuadorian or Mexican
descent.
This research focuses primarily on native residents living within the jurisdiction of
Community Board 9 (CBM9), an area in northern Manhattan that spans 1.5 miles and
encompasses the distinctive neighborhoods of Hamilton Heights, Morningside Heights
and Manhanttanville. The Hudson River serves as West Harlem's western boundary
while the avenues of Morningside, St. Nicholas, Edgecombe and Bradhurst border the
eastside of the neighborhood. To the north, 155th Street separates West Harlem from
Washington Heights/Inwood, and in the south, 110th Street and Cathedral Parkway
separates the area from the Upper Westside. The northern section of West Harlem
(between 155 th and 135 th), consists of historic Hamilton Heights and Sugar Hill district,
th
known for its early 20 century brownstones, built in styles such as Beaux Arts, Queen
Anne, Dutch and Romanesque Revival. The neighborhood ofManhattanville stretches
from 135th Street to 125t\ the area is home to City College, the newly built performing
arts space Harlem Stage and is the future site of the West Harlem Waterfront Park.
Morningside Heights is home to many academic and religious institutions such as
Columbia University, Bank Street College, Barnard College, The Jewish Theological

Seminary, The Cathedral of Saint John the Divine and the Riverside Church, from 125 th
Street to 110th Street. Throughout my interactions with residents, I increasingly became
aware of individuals who specifically noted their community affiliation to a specific
neighborhood (i.e. Morningside Heights) rather than to 'West Harlem'. Remaining
cognizant of an individual's decision to self-identify in this context was useful in
gathering understanding of one's place attachment and connection to the community in
general.
Research Scope and Methodology
Over the course of five months, from January to April of 2007, I spoke with
approximately twenty native residents, ranging from white, African-American, and
Latino and of varying class backgrounds. I engaged seven of these individuals in in-depth
semi-structured interviews, informal interactions and electronic exchanges. All of these
men and women either work or live in West Harlem; the majority were involved in
community work through local non-profits, arts and cultural organizations or the local
community board. Time constraints, financial difficulties and academic obligations in
Philadelphia severely limited my exchanges with my informants as well as my ability to
perform exceptionally extensive participant observation and fieldwork often required of
anthropological study. Despite these obstacles, my conversations with residents were
rich and insightful; I appreciated the openness, honesty and graciousness exhibited by
those who were available to interview. As a native of West Harlem and anthropology
student, upon embarking on this project I instantly became particularly sensitive to my
inherent bias and the plausibility of performing "me-search" in my own neighborhood.
While subjectivity in this case was inevitable and my status as a resident allowed for a

degree of comfort and amity with my informants, I consciously avoided assuming
residents' "neighborhood reality" which is often influenced by the lens of age, race, class,
gender, and citizenship status. Avoiding popular generalizations of native resident
experiences in light of gentrification motivates this research; such work cannot be
performed without the voices and input of community members. Prior to this study, I was
not familiar with my local Community Board or its members; I chose Community Board
9 Manhattan as a research site with the hope of meeting as di verse a group of residents as
possible, who possessed an interest in neighborhood affairs. It is significant to note that
this research study does not attempt to be comprehensive in nature; I am well aware that
even with additional time and resources, as one informant remarked, I would "barely
scratch the surface" of the intricacies involved in unpacking gentrification. The merit in
tackling the issue from an anthropological perspective allows the "people" to be put back
in the "picture". Beyond housing statistics, population studies and economic projections,
I hope to re-humanize the experience of gentrification; making the fears, frustrations, and
feelings of the residents palpable to a wider audience. Lastly, in exposing residents'
community work and activism, I aim to dismiss assumptions of passivity on behalf of my
neighbors, recognizing the agency and power of a community often viewed as politically
powerless and poor.

SECTION II
Capturing the "Other" and Deciphering Differences
As in much ofNew York, West Harlem is currently experiencing an affordable
housing crisis. According to the 2005 New York Housing and Vacancy Survey, the 2005
rental vacancy rate is significantly lower than 5 .0 percent, meeting the legal definition of
a housing emergency in the City 1• This problem, however, is more acute in the West
Harlem community due to the socio-economic demographic and the dramatic increase of
housing prices. About 90 percent of the housing units in the neighborhood are renteroccupied. Thus, a large majority of the community is susceptible to social and economic
marginalization through rent inflation, evictions and skyrocketing living costs. Data
shows that gentrification is alive and well in the neighborhood. According to the NYC
Dept of City Plauning Community District 9 Profile, building permits issued for new
2

residential construction increased exponentially between 2001-2003 by 252 percent ; this
luxury "condo-mania" is especially troubling as throughout West Harlem as one in four
residents spend more than half of their modest incomes on rent.

One instance of this frenzy is the Langston, a 10-story, 180-unit condominium
building at 68 Bradhurst Ave. between West 145th and West 146th streets near Hamilton
Heights. The Langston is part of the Cornerstone Program, a NYC Department of
Housing Preservation and Development initiative aimed to provide middle income and
market rate housing on vacant city land. A total of 120 units are reserved for families
1
US Census Bureau. New York Housing and Vacancy Survey 2005.
http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/housing/nychvs/nychvs.html
2
New York City Department of City Planning. Manhattan Community Board 9 Disttict Profile. Accessed:
May 2007.http://www.nyc.gov/html/dcp/pdfllucds/mn9profile.pdf

I

with household incomes from $40,140 to $103,620. The remaining 59 units are being
offered to the public at market rates. The condominium boasts nine-foot ceilings,
doorman-attended lobby, 24-hour concierge service, on-site valet, an 80-car garage, a
Starbucks, a New York Sports Club, and a valet for dry cleaning and tailoring services.
However, with the income limit required to gain residency higher than the median
income for the neighborhood, one questions the affordability of the new development.
Through conversations with my neighbors and family members, I learned that skepticism
and distrust abound against the Langston, which towers above my family's apartment in a
six-story tenement walk-up. Community members question the lack of effective
advertising of these apartments and fear the fates of low to moderate-income families
once '421a' 10-year tax abatements 3 expire.

"Check this out!" Philip shoves a photocopied sheet of paper across our tiny table. We
are sitting in the brand new Starbucks on the ground level of the Langston; apparently the
lure of an espresso brownie proved too much to bear. Naturally, my anthropological
antennae twitched on as I needed to find out who from the neighborhood would frequent
the ubiquitous coffee shop. On a dare, Philip wandered inside the expansive, polished
lobby of the condo and asked the security desk for sales and rental information. Although
Philip is white, he made sure to don my Penn sweatshirt to prove that he was "legit" as an
inquiring "future" resident.

3

The Cooperative and Condominium Abatement Program provides partial tax relief for condo owners and
co-op tenant-shareholders to reduce the disparity in property tax paid between residential Class 2 properties
(i.e., condominiums and cooperatives) and Class I prope11ies (i.e., one-, two-, and three-family homes),
which are assessed at a lower percentage of market value. The tax abatement is used as an incentive to spur
development and keep housing costs reasonable. When the tax abatement expires and the actual assessed
real estate taxes kick in owners are hit with very high monthly property taxes and usually have a hard time
reselling the property.

2

"Unbelievable!" he exclaims, causing our nearby neighbor, a middle-aged African
American man with a wireless Bluetooth headset in his ear, to peer at us above his laptop.
Glancing down, I automatically see what triggered his outburst. The price for an
apartment ranged from $630,000 for a two-bedroom to about a million for a penthouse.
No wonder darkened, curtain-less windows spotted the fa9ade of the Langston. "This all
seems so ... deliberate," I sigh, tracing the condensation rings ofmy watery blueberry
shaken iced tea. "Who can afford to live here? Who is living here?"
"Of course this is deliberate! Think about it. The median income of this neighborhood is
a little over $30,000. Say someone living here wants to purchase a home, right? The
maximum amount for home loan given by Chase Bank would probably not exceed
$40,000, and that's

if they have decent credit. That would not even cover the down

payment to purchase an apartment here! So, the developers purposely set the income limit
and price high enough that would only attract people who are making six figures or more,
which is, unfortunately, no one around here. Not to mention, Starbucks probably had a
discussion with the developers about the income requirements of the Langston residents
and scanned the neighborhood before deciding to open here. They just don't put
Starbucks anywhere."
Shaking my head, I glance toward the counter. A young white couple strolls
toward the cashier and places their order with the barista. The girl, with shoulder length
blond hair, pink t-shirt and denim skirt, slightly nudges and laughs with her male
companion, also blond, with strategically ripped jeans. Armed with their green tea
frappachinos, they stroll out into seasonably warm evening. I strain my neck to see the
direction in which they were headed; around the corner toward the entrance of the

3

building. Turning toward Philip, the irony in the game of "detect the gentrifier" is
blatantly obvious.
Philip, a sixth grade science teacher and graduate of Vassar College, moved to
West Harlem two years ago, after a short stint in Brooklyn proved unaffordable. He
shares a four bedroom apartment with three other teachers, who are also white. The area
allows him to live relatively comfortably on his teacher's salary. Yet, he too, carries a
sense of indignation at the sight of the glass and steel colossi that increasingly dot the
neighborhood and refuses to pay $10 for a burrito from the new and upscale Mexican
kitchen on his block, Tres Pasos. Although to many native residents his skin color might
signal otherwise, Philip's class status has mediated many of his experiences within the
neighborhood: from washing clothes in coin washers and dryers at the Laundromat to
filling prescriptions at the local Dominican pharmacy (chain drug stores are too far away)
to working out at a local gym that provides more affordable membership rates than the
downtown-friendly New York Sports Club. Philip feels his experiences grant him a kind
of credibility that cannot be attained by those who take retreat in the penthouses above us,
with chain stores an elevator ride away.
I listened quietly as he continued his rant, realizing the unfairness in generalizing
an entire population of newcomers, but unable to shake the feeling that the espresso
brownie was not meant for me. For instance, in "There Goes the 'Hood: Views of
Gentrification from the Ground Up", Lance Freeman illustrates similar notions held by
blacks in Harlem, in response to the changing landscape and perceived influx of white
newcomers. Freeman asserts that while statistics on real demographic changes in Harlem
may not be significant, both perceptions and secondary changes might be impacted

4

disproportionately. 4 A prevalent sentiment among his respondents was that a small
increase in the white population was correlated with a substantial boost in new services
and amenities (such as banks, commercial pharmacies, big chain supermarkets and new
restaurants). From my own ethnographic work, this mistrust is amplified by a
conspicuous lack of improvements in areas in dire need of development such as
affordable housing, health services delivery, and quality schools. Although most agree
that the economic redevelopment has benefited some but not all, the change was seen as a
mixed blessing among Freeman's interviewees. Freeman relays the experience of one
Harlemite who was suspicious of the "sudden" presence of these improvements but
welcomed the new opportunities to shop:
"Ms. Johnson is an African American who clearly subscribes to the notion that the
improvements taking place in Harlem were not for "us," meaning blacks, but for
"them," meaning whites ... Although improvement in services in her mind reflects
the discriminatory treatment black neighborhoods receive, she is more than happy
to take advantage of these improvements. That residents would appreciate
improved amenities, in hindsight, seems like common sense. Who wouldn't
appreciate better stores in which to shop?" (pp. 67)5
Likewise, the "us" versus "them" paradigm was echoed in many of my
conversations family members during weekly trips to the grocery store. "Who do you
think is going to live in there?" says my aunt, rolling her eyes, as we slowly lug our
shopping cart up a familiarly steep hill toward Edgecombe Ave. My mother, shaking her
head, dryly adds, "I can take a wild guess". These comments usually complement our
weekly shopping trips to Pathmark, a 42,000 square foot supermarket that opened two
years ago. Incidentally, the grocery store sits below 125 high-rise apartments in another

4

Freeman, Lance. There Goes the 'Hood: Views of Gentrification From the Gronnd Up. Philadelphia:
Temple University Press, 2006
5
Freeman, Lance. There Goes the 'Hood: Views of Gentrification From the Ground Up. Philadelphia:
Temple University Press, 2006

5

mixed-use development across the street from the Langston, aptly named the Hamilton
(as in Hamilton Heights). Although the convenience of a 24-hour supermarket is a
welcome addition to the neighborhood, sometimes a short run for a gallon of milk or loaf
of bread is bittersweet. "It's going to be the same type of people who live in there,"
Auntie Lisa sighs, dismissively motioning a bulky plastic grocery bag toward the
Hamilton. "No one around here can afford to live in that building ... you see the type of
people that come in and out of there, and it's no one that looks like us."

No one like us. Similar sentiments echoed throughout my interviews and field
experiences. The concept of "us" inherently infers a contra but non-descriptive idea of
"them" or "the other"; deciphering these ambiguous binary constructs within the already
complex issues presented by gentrification proved challenging. In a cautious attempt to
curb my own subjectivity, I was careful to separate my own conceptions of the "other"
from those of my informants. Although it is quite easy to label a young white
professional entering a luxury apartment building as a 'gentrifier', doing so undermines
the ways in which other groups, organizations and institutions motivated by sociopolitical and economic forces construct and influence neighborhood change as well.
Additionally, these judgments are based on explicit visual representations (Starbucks
frappachinos, towering glass and steel high rises, upscale restaurants) and traditional
images (young, upwardly-mobile whites) of gentrification. Moreover, such assumptions
do not adequately reflect the diverse opinions of native residents from varying social,
economic and cultural backgrounds. In a 200 I New Yark Times interview, author and

6

sociologist Monique Taylor, sums up the difficulties in setting up the "insider" vs.
"outsider" paradigm strictly along racial fault lines:

"The mistake that people make sometimes in these gentrification battles is to simplify
who are the insiders and the outsiders and who are the good guys and the bad guys. In the
case of Harlem, I think everybody wanted to see whites as being outsiders and as bad
guys. Once you get there and realize there are white and black outsiders and white and
black insiders, it's a more complicated thing. "6
A review of my conversations with residents on the topic demonstrates that
residents often hold differing views about neighborhood change, recognizing its nuanced
nature as well as its advantages and its disadvantages. Michael Palma, a second
generation resident of Hamilton Heights, provides a viewpoint often missing from the
literature on gentrification in Harlem: a Latino perspective. Michael is a financial
management and fundraising consultant to small and mid-sized non-profits, ranging from
Latino theatre companies to reproductive choice organizations. He also serves as the
Chair of the newly-formed Arts and Cultural Committee for Community Board 9 and is
currently completing a photography project on Manhattanville. Over the past few
decades, his family has worked hard to make their neighborhood a decent place to live;
most notably through their neighborhood association, with efforts to clean-up drug
infested areas and fights for decent, affordable housing. One brisk Friday evening in
February we discussed his view toward his neighborhood and the current changes taking
place. From the outset of our interview, Michael's past experiences provide a challenge
to the perceived racial landscape of West Harlem as an anchored, minority community:

6

Scott, Janny. "White Flight, This Time Toward Harlem; Newcomers and Good Times Bring Hope, and
Fears of Displacement". The New York Times. February 25, 2001

7

"What you call West Harlem, mainly Manhattanville, Hamilton Heights and
Washington Heights has always been a neighborhood in flux, always been a
neighborhood that changes a lot. .. very different than Central Harlem, very, very
different. It's very different and it changes, with many different groups of people.
And the people that live there, they move in and they move out, and another set of
people move in. When I was growing up, I only knew one black person in my
neighborhood ... he was the super of a building nearby, Mr. Louie. Everyone else
was Irish, Italian or Puerto Rican or Cuban. There weren't even any Dominicans
in my neighborhood growing up ... there were none, and there were no blacks
when my father grew up. The only blacks my father knew of were the bourgeoisie
black people who lived on Sugar Hill."
Although a longtime resident, in viewing almost 40 years of demographic shifts and
neighborhood change, Michael constructs his community as one undergoing frequent
transformation. Although, the present state of rapid transformation is somewhat expected,
it is no less surprising or jarring. In light of his efforts to reform his community, Michael
remarks that one neighborhood feature that resisted change over the past 30 years is 3333
Broadway, a massive public housing project, sometimes negatively referred to as the
"albatross and anchor" of the up and coming neighborhood. The complex consists of 5
large high-rise block towers, rising to 35 stories and comprises 1, 100 apartments; 90
percent of these apartments house low-income families. Yet, with increasing pressures
facilitated by Columbia University's expansion into West Harlem and the real estate
market speculation frenzy, even 3333 Broadway is not immune to the proverbial winds of
change. Here, the intersection of middle class and working class tensions, layered by
mixed feelings toward displacement, discomfort toward new neighbors and anger at the
rapid loss of affordable housing is discovered. The duality of "otherness" is illustrated
along class (toward the low-income Latinos and Blacks living in 3333 Broadway) and
racial (toward white college-aged residents moving into the building) lines, making the
"new" change occurring, disconcerting:

8

Shakirah: Well. .. have you seen people being displaced by what's happening?
Michael (nodding): Oh yeah, yeah .. .I park my car in a garage underneath 3333
Broadway, and the only way you get into it is from the viaduct ... you know, that bridge
between Grant's Tomb[Memorial] and 135 th? I park my car there at the back
entrance ... and that's where the moving trucks are. And they're always there moving
people out. And I saw something there for the first time, that I had never seen before;
what looked like to be college students, walking out of the building with dogs on leashes.
Which signals to me that they're not visitors leaving a building ... they live there. Like,
college students ... white kids ... teenagers from about maybe your age or maybe just out of
college. And I've never never seen anything like that at 3333 Broadway. Never. And I
saw that building being built, from when they tore down that gasoline station and car
dealership that used to be there? And never since that, have I seen white people in that
building, as much as I do now. Every time I go to pick up my car. . .I see a moving van,
moving people out and then moving people in.
Shakirah: And how does that stark reality ... every time you go and park up your
car ... make you feel about what's going on in the neighborhood?
Michael: It makes me realize how this neighborhood is going to change. I always said to
myself our neighborhood is never going to change ... as long as that building 3 33
Broadway ... that is a really bad example of really bad city planning, you can't put that
many people in that small of a space. And as this area (the Upper West Side) got better,
this area used to be Puerto Rican by the way, and became gentrified; the development
[growing uptown] would always stop at that building, right at 3333 Broadway. And when
I live there [West Harlem] in the 70's and early 80s, I wanted it to change, I wanted it to
change badly because it was so bad everywhere. Every time I wanted to enjoy myself!
had to hop on a train and go downtown. I used to hang out around 96 th street a lot. But
what happens when I got home? I could not do that. Absolutely could not. To a certain
degree I almost wanted there to be gentrification, I wanted everyone in 3 3 3 3 out, because
in my mind, they were all bad. They were a lot of drug dealers there. And they used to,
they don't do this anymore, hang out in the streets and have barbeques and have food out
and it would stink ... and I would be embarrassed. My friends from Columbia would come
over to my house or to my neighborhood and I would be embarrassed. There was really a
welfare mentality back then, and maybe they changed or public policy changed, because
they was no incentive rather to just collect a check and just live there."

Thus, the marked difference in demographics in West Harlem present alternative
experiences in light of neighborhood change is may be shaped by class status and
connection to a racial or ethnic group. As a member of Community Board 9, Michael
experiences firsthand the racial and class politics involved in community revitalization
and development. For instance, the branding of Harlem as primarily a "black" space and
9

solely an enclave for black culturebylocaLleadershipdownpiaysthepresenceofalarge
Dominican, Mexican, and Puerto Rican population in the neighborhood.

Michael:

Shakirah:
Michael:

"I think the people who call [the neighborhood] West Harlem have an
economic interest in calling it West Harlem ... like the politicians ... the
funny thing is that the politicians especially the African American
politicians, want to call everything "Harlem". But, ifI go to them and say
let's put a Latino theater right in the middle of 125 th Street ... forget
that ... they would balk at it, saying 'Oh no no no, that's not African
American, that's not African American.' The River to River Plan [along
125 th street]? It goes from Broadway to 2 nd Ave, that's not river to river.
Now, what does that leave out? It leaves out the Latinos on the east side
and it leaves out the Latinos on the west side. If you want to call West
Harlem, West Harlem, then include the Latinos. You can't call it West
Harlem and then ignore them. That River to River plan is more about arts
and culture by way of economic development, not arts and culture through
the people that actually live there or the culture that actually exists there.
My question to you would be then ... whose culture or whose art?
Well, art is artifacts, or works of art. Culture is people, their food, their
language, the way they dress, the way they talk, the way they perceive
things ... that's culture. It's not necessarily the Harlem Renaissance, it's not
necessarily jazz, Louie Armstrong, Cab Calloway or the Cotton Club. It's
not only Muhammad Ali, it's not only Malcolm X. It's not only Charlie
Rangel or Adam Clayton Powell Sr. or Jr. It's a lot more than that,
especially, especially in West Harlem.

In illustrating the conspicuous (and seemingly deliberate) lack of Latino influence
or inclusion on Harlem's main thoroughfare mediated by high-powered AfricanAmericans and institutions, Michael demonstrates the problematic existence of the "us"
versus "them" dynamic beyond a white and black construct in Harlem. This paradigm of
'otherness' or 'foreignness' amongst Blacks and Latinos is exacerbated by spatial
boundaries, language barriers and fueled by aggressive economic policies and
development bent on preserving, packaging and promoting a specific part of Harlem's
history, specifically it's black history. While there are no apparent consequences of an
"us" versus "them" construct between blacks and whites beyond palpable tensions, this

10

conceptbetweenblacksandLatinosisacutelydamaging,aspoliticaLleadershipin-------Harlem on every level (which is exclusively African American), Community Boards 9
and 10 (made up of primarily black residents) and federally-sponsored initiatives like the
Upper Manhattan Empowerment Zone have mainly the interests of African-Americans in
mind.
Similar sentiments were echoed in a conversation with Tom DeMott, a white
middle-aged, 35-year resident ofManhattanville. Tom is a retired postal worker, an
activist with the anti-Columbia expansion community group, Coalition to Preserve
Community (CPC) and a member of Community Board 9. Over tuna sandwiches at a
conference on gentrification in March, hosted by the Fordham School of Social Work,
Tom and I discussed his political activities and how he has seen similar tensions between
the community and Harlem leadership:

"This is a definite contention with Central Harlem leadership and its
politicians .. .it simply does not represent the needs and concerns of the large
Latino community that lives here ... they [politicians] seem to think that someone
else represents them [the Latino community]."
In all, these actions perpetuate a racial, cultural and economic isolation of Latinos
amplified by gentrification that ironically, plagued the black community in the decades
prior to the surge in reinvestment and development. Such isolation and a continued lack
of cross-cultural and cross-class interaction create figurative boundaries and multiple
schemas of the "other": Black vs. Latino, immigrant vs. citizen, English-spealcing vs.
Spanish-spealcing, voter vs. non-voter, Harlemite vs. outsider. In "Harlemworld: Doing
Race and Class in Contemporary Black America", anthropologist John Jackson speaks
directly to this issue:

11

To create a black Harlem of the past or the present always entails examining
trajectories of difference besides racial ones. Many residents employ class and
ethnicity as constitutive elements in the creation of a racialized space to which,
they claim only some can rightfully belong. Some residents can highlight
distinctions between African Americans and other residents who are not
necessarily granted a legitimate place in the community. Sometimes, Africans,
Latinos, and West Indians can be placed well outside the boundaries of valid
citizenship, other times safely within it. Class specific differences --- often
translated through obvious extremes of poverty and wealth, membership in the
proverbial underclass or middle class --- can also be mobilized to determine
degrees of community belonging (pp 54).

Conclusions
The idea of the "other" carries many different constructions for the residents of
West Harlem, from people (the black politician, the young white professional, the black
middle class, Latino occupants in housing projects to black young men), places or
structures (Starbucks, condominiums, upscale restaurants, grocery stores, and massive
public housing projects), activities (walking small dogs at night, frequenting local small
businesses, hanging outside on porch steps or street comers) to even food (wheat bread
and soy milk in bodegas, espresso brownies and overpriced chicken burritos). This
variance demonstrates that the construction of the other in West Harlem is not merely
facilitated by one homogenous experience through just class or race or gender; it is
influenced by one's relation to all three, in addition to immigrant status, education, and
political power. These multiple statuses subsequently inform one's response to
neighborhood change. Residents see their neighborhood change through multiple lenses,
which breeds conflicting feelings not only among groups, but within individuals as well.
The view of poor, black people being kicked out by wealthy white professionals (while it

12

-----UOesandhashappened)oversimplifiestheissue,negatingandexcludingthevadeU---------experiences of a diverse community. The political undertones of this exclusion
demonstrate struggles among internal forces within the community; struggles that
undermine the assumption of inclusive and equitable development on behalf of the entire
neighborhood.
Perceived (and feared) demographic changes, accompanying economic
development and neighborhood improvements also shape residents' view of the "other";
again, these perspectives vary among race, class, ethnicity and gender, providing a
gradation of responses to gentrification. Several of my respondents asserted that Harlem
is at a crossroads, and while there is no one way to conceptualize its transformation, the
economic development occurring is welcomed as it is suspiciously regarded. The impact
of economic forces such as increased costs of living, a lack of decent affordable housing,
and availability of only low-wage jobs will eventually force class connections and
disparities to play an increasingly large part in residents' response to neighborhood
change. It is significant to note that race-wise, the area's strong Latino presence and
involved native white residents challenge the assumption of a homogenous experience
mediated by black values and culture; yet class disparities are seemingly more salient to
today's discussion on neighborhood change.
Final Conclusions

The examination of gentrification within diverse, urban neighborhoods like West
Harlem requires researchers to look beyond the binary concept of black versus white
presented by the literature. This example has boded well over the past 25 years with
ample, and tried and true evidence from multiple cities; however, the relevance of

13

-------studyingsimifareconomicforG€saru:ltrendswagedupon-multi.etlmi-eand-multi.rncia,,__ _ _ _ _ __
connnunities is increasingly important. While unpacking the complexities that compose
neighborhood change presents daunting challenges to the lone researcher; new study that
is multi-disciplinary and comprehensive in nature with special attention to the intricacies
of diverse populations is needed. Within my own research, I developed enhanced
sensitivities toward these complexities through my exchanges with community residents.
My informants provided valuable insights that allowed me to maintain multiple
perspectives, while challenging my subjectivity on an issue I previously believed, as a
native as well, to be straightforward. Several factors were culturally and socially specific
to neighborhood change in West Harlem. First, population patterns over the past 90 years
show a neighborhood that has always experienced fluctuations in demographics. This is a
significant distinction from Central Harlem (which has been historically culturally
anchored by African-Americans and West Indians), as the connnunity shows an
interesting mix of the old (descendents oflrish, Italian or Jewish families), the constant
(several generations of Cubans and Puerto Ricans) and the new (immigrants from the
Dominican Republic, Mexico and Ecuador). The existence of and diversity within a
large Latino connnunity in West Harlem also crafts a multitude of experiences with
gentrification. Although the literature on gentrification has explored Latino communities
in East Harlem, Los Angeles and San Francisco, the research is often presented within a
"brown vs. white" paradigm; downplaying the significance of class disparities among
established residents and the newly arrived and their respective experiences with
neighborhood change. In regards to class differences, the arrival of upwardly mobile
minorities as property owners adds another layer of complexity. Although race and

14

------------1,thnicitygrantstheinfluxoftheseindividuals,whatMoniqueTaylorcalls,-a-chanc:t:--------toward "racial solidarity and fellowship" 7 with existing residents, race does not grant
immunity from the inevitable class clash. Lastly, the diversity of West Harlem is clearly
defined by spatial boundaries. Avenues and intersections act as borders for different
ethnic groups that co-exist but rarely interact, as residents choose to create and maintain
smaller communities based on identity within the larger neighborhood. Thus,
understanding the concept of a "neighborhood of neighborhoods" within West Harlem is
significant in deciphering how gentrification threatens to disrupt community structure and
organization. In all, these features of West Harlem offer new challenges to the presumed
homogenous experience of existing resident in the face of neighborhood change.
Knowledge of these findings should spur further and more exhaustive research on this
topic, bringing fresh debate to the discussion of gentrification in urban communities.

The research process is always a continuing one, and several questions
surrounding the cultural aftershocks of gentrification were raised in hindsight of this
research experience. In future anthropological examinations of this or similar topics,
researchers should ask: what are the daily activities, informal and formal exchanges,
physical places and behaviors that mold neighborhood into a community? Secondly, what
defines an individual's belonging to that community? Answers to such queries may allow
for the discussion of neighborhood change beyond the "market" lens; broaching the issue
of how gentrification not only changes the economic fabric of a community but threatens
to disrupt one's membership within and connection to their neighborhood.
7 Taylor, Monique M. Harlem: Between heaven and hell. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
2002.

15

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _u_ihliograph_,,__ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __
Books
Boyd, Herb ed. Harlem reader: a celebration of New York's most famous neighborhood,
from the renaissance years to the twenty-first century. New York: Three Rivers Press,
2003.
Gilliatt, Stephen. How the poor adapt to poverty in capitalism. New York: Edwin Mellen
Press, 2001.
Freeman, Lance. There Goes the 'Hood: Views of Gentrification From the Ground Up.
Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 2006
Geertz,C., Person,Time and Conduct in Bah from Interpretation of Cultures (New
York,1973)

Hannerz, Ulf. Exploring the city: inquiries toward an urban anthropology. New York:
Columbia University Press, 1980.
Jackson, John L., Jr. Harlemworld: doing race and class in contemporary Black America
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001.
Leeds, Anthony. Cities, classes, and the social order. Edited by Roger Sanjek. Ithaca,
NY.: Cornell University Press, 1994.
Sharman, Russell L. The Tenants of East Harlem. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 2006.
Taylor, Monique M. Harlem between heaven and hell. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 2002.
Tate, Gayle T. and Lewis A. Randolph, eds. The Black urban community: from dusk till
dawn. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006.
Vietorisz, Thomas, and Bennett Harrison. Economic Development of Harlem. New York:
Praeger, 1970.
Zukin, Sharon. The Cultures of Cities. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell, 1995.

Articles
Atkinson, R. (2003). Introduction: Misunderstood Savior or Vengeful Wrecker? The
Many Meanings and Problems of Gentrification. Urban Studies, 40(12), 2343-2350.
Bostic, R. W., & Martin, R. W. (2003). Black Home-owners as a Gentrifying Force?
Neighborhood Dynamics in the Context of Minority Home-ownership. Urban Studies,

Butler, T., & Robson, G. (2003). Negotiating Their Way In: The Middle Classes,
Gentrification and the Deployment of Capital in a Globalizing Metropolis. Urban
Studies, 40(9), 1791-1809.
Keating, L. (2000). Redeveloping Public Housing: Relearning Urban Renewal's Lessons.
Journal of the American Planning Association, 66(4), 384-397.
Freeman, L. (2005). Displacement or Succession? Residential Mobility in Gentrifying
Neighborhoods. Urban Affairs Review, 40(4), 463-491.
Immergluck, D., & Smith, G. (2003). Measuring Neighborhood Diversity and Stability in
Home-Buying. Journal of Urban Affairs, 25(4), 473-491.
Paris, Jenell Williams. (2001) "We've seen this coming": resident activists shaping
neighborhood redevelopment in Washington, D.C. Transforming Anthropology ,10 (I):
28-38
Prince, Sabiyha. (2005). Race, Class and the Packaging of Harlem. Identities, 12 (3), 385404.
Redfern, P.A. (2003). What Makes Gentrification 'Gentrification"? Urban Studies,
40(12), 2351-2366.
Rofe, M. W. (2003). "I want to be Global": Theorizing the Gentrifying Class as an
Emergent Elite Global Community. Urban Studies, 40(12), 2511-2526.
Schaffer, Richard; Smith, Neil. (1986) The Gentrification of Harlem? Annals of the
Association ofAmerican Geographers, 76 (3): 347-365.
Sullivan DM. (2006). Assessing residents' opinions on changes in a gentrifying
neighborhood: A case study of the Alberta neighborhood in Portland, Oregon
Housing Policy Debate 17 (3): 595-624.

Databases and Online Resources for Neighborhood Data and Demographics
New York City Department of City Planning. Manhattan Community Board 9 District
Profile. Accessed: May 2007 .http://www.nyc.gov/html/dcp/pdf/lucds/mn9profile.pdf
Manhattan Community Board 10 (Central Harlem) District Profile and Website
http://www.nyc.gov/html/dcp/pdil'lucds/nm 10profile. pdf
http://www.cblO.org/browse.php?st=homepage
Columbia University Libraries: General Statistical Sources for NYC
http://www.columbia.edu/cu/lweb/indiv/lehman/guides/stats/ny.html#NYC

New York City Housing and Neighborhood Information System
http://www.nychanis.com/NYU/NYCHANIS/Start.aspx
th

NYU Wagner NYC Planning Portal: 125 Street Corridor
http://www.plannyc.org/project-2 l- l 25th-Street-Corridor

Local Newspapers
Scott, Janny. "White Flight, This Time Toward Harlem; Newcomers and Good Times
Bring Hope, and Fears of Displacement". The New York Times. February 25, 2001
Kugel, Seth. Weekend in New York: Harlem; An Uptown Renaissance (Again)
The New York Times. September 24, 2006

